START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 91 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 91 
(Delegates Healey and Ruth) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Agriculture - Neonicotinoid Pesticides - Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from distributing, selling, or using any corn, soybean, or wheat 
seeds that have been coated in or treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide. In addition, the 
bill generally prohibits a person from using a neonicotinoid pesticide to treat  
outdoor ornamental plants and turf, except as specified. The bill authorizes the  
Secretary of Agriculture to temporarily suspend both of these prohibitions under specified 
conditions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues are expected to decrease annually beginning in 
FY 2027, as discussed below. General fund expenditures increase by $337,800 in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization and inflation. State expenditures (all/multiple funds) for 
various State agencies may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$337,800 
$279,900 
$293,300 
$306,700 
$320,000 
All/Mult Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($337,800) 
($279,900) 
($293,300) 
($306,700) 
($320,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 91/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Distribution, Sale, or Use of Certain Seeds Coated in or Treated with a Neonicotinoid 
Pesticide 
 
The bill prohibits a person from distributing, selling, or using any corn, soybean, or wheat 
seeds coated in or treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide. The Secretary of Agriculture may 
temporarily suspend the prohibition if the Secretary, in consultation with the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) and the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), 
determines that (1) there is an insufficient amount of commercially available seed that has 
not been treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide or (2) compliance with the prohibition 
would result in an undue financial hardship to agricultural producers. Any temporary 
suspension must be in effect for one year, after which the Secretary must reevaluate the 
suspension in accordance with the bill. The Secretary must publish a written directive of 
any temporary suspension that specifies the type of seeds authorized under the directive 
and the date by which the Secretary will reevaluate the suspension. 
 
Use of Neonicotinoid Pesticides to Treat Outdoor Ornamental Plants and Turf 
 
The bill also prohibits a person from using a neonicotinoid pesticide to treat outdoor 
ornamental plants and turf. This prohibition, however, does not apply to the production of 
agricultural commodities and the application of pesticides by a certified applicator to treat 
invasive species in woody plants. 
 
The Secretary of Agriculture may temporarily suspend the prohibition if the Secretary, in 
consultation with MDE and DNR, determines that (1) a valid “environmental emergency” 
exists; (2) a neonicotinoid pesticide would be effective in addressing the environmental 
emergency; and (3) there is no other less harmful pesticide or pest management practice 
that would be effective in addressing the environmental emergency. The Secretary must 
publish a written directive of any temporary suspension that specifies the type of 
neonicotinoid pesticide authorized for use under the directive and the date through which 
the directive applies, which may not be longer than one year from the effective date of the 
directive. 
 
“Environmental emergency” means an occurrence of any pest which presents (1) a 
significant risk of harm or injury to the environment or (2) a significant harm, injury, or 
loss to agricultural crops. The term includes the presence of pests for which the  
Secretary of Agriculture, in consultation with MDE and DNR, determines need preventive 
measures to avert a significant risk. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 91/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Pesticide Use and Regulation 
 
The Secretary of Agriculture is required to take various actions to regulate pesticide use, 
including (1) adopting rules and regulations governing the storage, sale, distribution, 
exchange, use, and disposal of any pesticide and its container and (2) prescribing, when 
necessary, the time and conditions under which a pesticide may be sold, distributed, 
exchanged, or used in different areas of the State. The Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA) regulations require that a person observe all precautions in the handling, use, 
storage, and disposal of pesticides, so that nontarget areas or organisms, including humans, 
do not suffer injury, and unreasonable adverse effects on the environment do not occur or 
are minimized. 
 
Generally, to be sold, distributed, or used in Maryland, a pesticide must be registered by 
both MDA and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Specified pesticides that have 
greater potential for causing harm are designated as “restricted use pesticides” and may 
only be used by a certified applicator or a person working under the supervision of a 
certified applicator. Each commercial application of any pesticide must be under the 
supervision of a certified applicator who is responsible and liable for the application. 
 
The State Chemist Section within MDA regulates the sale and distribution of pesticides, 
among other things. Each pesticide product must be registered annually; the annual fee is 
$110 per product. Registration fees are paid into the State Chemist Fund. 
 
Neonicotinoid Pesticides 
 
Chapters 661 and 662 of 2016, among other things, established certain restrictions on the 
sale and use of neonicotinoid pesticides. With the exception of certain pet care, personal 
care, and indoor pest control products, neonicotinoid pesticides may not be sold at retail 
unless the person also sells a restricted use pesticide. A neonicotinoid pesticide may only 
be sold at retail to a certified applicator or farmer and may only be used by a certified 
applicator or a farmer (using the pesticide for agricultural purposes), a person working 
under a certified applicator’s or farmer’s supervision, or a veterinarian. 
 
Turf and Seed Section 
 
The Turf and Seed Section within MDA conducts seed inspection, testing, certification, 
and quality control services. Farmers and seed producers must generally have seeds 
certified before use or distribution. Fees for field inspection and tagging of bagged and 
bulk seed are established in regulation. For example, the field inspection fee for small 
grains is $1.75 per acre, with a $25 minimum charge for each variety produced. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 91/ Page 4 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues for MDA are anticipated to decrease by an 
indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2027. Although a reliable estimate of the decrease 
in special fund revenues cannot be made at this time, special fund revenues could decrease 
by more than $100,000 annually, as discussed below. 
 
MDA’s State Chemist Section registers pesticide products on an annual basis for a fee of 
$110 per product. Because the bill generally prohibits the use of neonicotinoid pesticides 
to treat outdoor ornamental plants and turf and prohibits the distribution, sale, or use of 
certain seeds coated in or treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide, MDA anticipates that, 
under the bill, fewer pesticide products will be registered, leading to a decrease in 
special fund revenues from registration fees. While it is unknown how many 
MDA-registered pesticides are specific to seed treatment and turf and ornamental 
applications, MDA advises that more than 1,000 registered pesticide products contain 
neonicotinoids. For illustrative purposes only, if 1,000 fewer pesticide products are 
registered each year, special fund revenues to the State Chemist Fund decrease 
by $110,000 annually. 
 
MDA further advises that its Turf and Seed Section collects approximately $25,000 
annually in seed certification fees. Because the bill prohibits a person from distributing, 
selling, or using specified seeds coated in or treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide, MDA 
anticipates a decrease in its seed certification activities. As a result, special fund revenues 
from seed certification fees are anticipated to decrease beginning in fiscal 2027. To the 
extent the bill’s prohibition on the distribution, sale, or use of affected seeds is temporarily 
suspended by the Secretary of Agriculture, however, as provided by the bill, any such effect 
is delayed until the prohibition takes effect. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Administrative Costs to Enforce the Bill’s Prohibitions 
 
General fund expenditures for MDA increase by $337,792 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
four inspectors (two for the State Chemist Section and two for the Pesticide Regulation 
Section) to perform inspections, handle complaint investigations, and generally enforce the 
bill’s prohibitions. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including 
the purchase of four vehicles), and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$202,279 
Vehicle Purchases 
94,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    41,513 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$337,792 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 91/ Page 5 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
It is assumed that DNR and MDE can consult with MDA as necessary – regarding 
temporary suspensions – using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Other State Agencies as Users of Products Affected by the Bill 
 
Due to the bill’s prohibition on using seeds that have been treated with neonicotinoid 
pesticides and the bill’s general prohibition on using neonicotinoid pesticides to treat 
outdoor ornamental plants and turf, State expenditures (all/multiple fund types) for other 
State agencies may increase to purchase alternative seeds and/or to use alternative pesticide 
products. The extent to which other State agencies are affected is unknown. As an example 
of an affected State agency, DNR advises that it uses corn and seeds treated with 
neonicotinoid pesticides as part of its wildlife management activities. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the effect described above on State agencies that may use 
affected seeds or pesticides, any local governments that use neonicotinoid pesticides to 
treat outdoor ornamental plants and turf may incur additional costs to use alternative 
pesticide products. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill likely has a meaningful effect on small business 
agricultural producers and pest control businesses. 
 
With respect to the bill’s prohibition relating to the distribution, sale, or use of certain seeds 
coated in or treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide, MDA advises that neonicotinoid-treated 
seeds are standard throughout the industry, and that purchasing untreated seed is difficult 
and could cost farmers an extra $150 per bag (an increase of $75 per acre). MDA further 
advises that pesticide application costs are expected to increase due to the use of untreated 
seed, as in-furrow treatments during planting will be needed. Additionally, MDA reports 
that the use of untreated seed requires an increase in tillage to control pest risk, which 
further increases costs. The prohibition also likely has a significant impact on producers 
and dealers that sell neonicotinoid-treated seed. However, under the bill, the  
Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to temporarily suspend the prohibition if the 
Secretary, in consultation with MDE and DNR, determines that (1) there is an insufficient 
amount of commercially available seed that has not been treated with a neonicotinoid 
pesticide or (2) compliance with the prohibition would result in an undue financial hardship 
to agricultural producers. Accordingly, the overall effect on agricultural producers is 
unclear. 
 
With respect to the bill’s prohibition on the use of neonicotinoid pesticides to treat outdoor 
ornamental plants and turf, pest control businesses that use neonicotinoid pesticides for 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 91/ Page 6 
those purposes are likely to incur additional costs to use alternative pesticides; MDA 
reports that alternatives cost approximately $100 to $120 per acre, while neonicotinoid 
pesticides cost approximately $15 to $25 per acre. Any increase in costs for pest control 
businesses are likely passed on to customers in the form of higher prices. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6