START OF PAGE 1
t 
  HB 30 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 30 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Safety - Department of State Police - Police-Initiated Towing - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of State Police (DSP), by January 1, 2024, to establish 
approved rates for tow companies involved in police-initiated towing and recovery of 
light‑duty vehicles (gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less). This rate setting is not 
part of the statutory responsibilities of the Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint 
Resolution for Police-Initiated Medium‐Duty and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DSP can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Police‐initiated Towing – In General 
 
Under current law, “police‐initiated towing” is defined as the towing or recovery of a 
commercial motor vehicle that was authorized, requested, or dispatched by DSP. The bill 
removes the limited application to commercial vehicles. Under the bill, police-initiated 
towing applies to all vehicles for which towing or recovery was authorized, requested, or 
dispatched by DSP. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 30/ Page 2 
Current law defines “tow list” as the list of towing businesses authorized by DSP to perform 
police-initiated towing services of disabled or abandoned commercial vehicles within 
DSP’s jurisdiction. The bill does not alter this provision and retains its limited application 
to commercial vehicles. 
 
Department of State Police Requirements and Procedures for Police‐initiated Towing 
 
Current law requires DSP, among other things, to establish and maintain a tow list, by 
county, of qualifying tow companies for police-initiated towing by DSP. DSP had to 
require a tow company on that list to ban the use of per pound billing by October 1, 2023. 
By January 1, 2024, DSP had to establish the approved rates for medium‐ and heavy-duty 
towing and recovery that may be charged by a tow company on the tow list. The bill 
expands this provision to require DSP to establish approved rates for light-duty towing and 
recovery by that same date, January 1, 2024. 
 
Under current law, a tow company may charge less than (but not more than) the approved 
rates. “Approved rates” are the maximum rates approved by DSP that apply to 
police‑initiated towing and recovery services. As noted above, the bill prohibits the 
approved rates for light-duty towing and recovery from exceeding a percentage of the 
approved rates for medium-duty towing and recovery charged by a tow company. The bill 
does not specify a percentage.  
 
Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint Resolution for Police‑Initiated Medium‐Duty 
and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery  
 
Chapter 669 of 2023 established the Committee on Rate Setting and Complaint Resolution 
for Police‑Initiated Medium‐Duty and Heavy‐Duty Towing and Recovery within DSP, 
which is responsible for recommending approved rates for police-initiated towing and 
recovery services (required to be done by December 1, 2023). The bill clarifies that the 
committee’s responsibilities apply to medium-duty and heavy-duty towing and recovery 
services.  
 
Under current law and unchanged by the bill, the committee must also: 
 
 
meet at least once every three years to review and consider modification of the 
approved rates;  
 
request information and comments from other parties of interest to assist with its 
work; 
 
recommend to DSP a process for resolving towing complaints; and 
 
make any additional recommendations to DSP that the committee considers 
appropriate. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 30/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s provisions may have a meaningful impact on small 
business tow companies or small businesses that are the subject of police-initiated towing.  
 
Additional Comments:  As noted above, the bill repeals the limited application of 
“police‑initiated towing” to commercial vehicles. However, the bill retains references to 
the towing and recovery of commercial vehicles in related provisions. This analysis 
assumes that the provisions described above continue to apply to commercial vehicles, as 
specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 578 (Senator James) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3