START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 8 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 8 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Dangerous Driver Abatement Program - Establishment 
(Dangerous Driver Accountability Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Dangerous Driver Abatement Program, administered by the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA), to reduce motor vehicle-related deaths by requiring repeat 
offenders to complete an MVA-approved driver accountability and safety course or be 
subject to sanctions (including vehicle registration suspension), as specified. The bill 
applies to a “repeat offender” who accumulates multiple violations recorded by certain 
automated enforcement systems (i.e., red light cameras, automated railroad grade crossing 
enforcement systems, school bus monitoring cameras, stop sign monitoring systems, speed 
cameras, or work zone speed cameras). By January 31, 2028, and each year thereafter, 
MVA must publish on its website and report to the General Assembly on the number of 
participants in the program in the immediately preceding year, disaggregated by race, 
income, and geography. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although MVA can generally develop the course and administer the program 
with existing resources, certain provisions of the bill cannot be directly implemented, as 
discussed below. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential operational and fiscal impact on local governments to provide the 
required citations data to MVA, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 8/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Repeat Offenders  
 
The bill defines “repeat offender” as an owner of a motor vehicle that, within a 
12‑month period, is recorded by those automated enforcement systems a certain number of 
times (generally, three or more times, although the threshold is higher – five or more 
times – for speed cameras and work zone speed cameras). 
 
Required Notice  
 
MVA must provide written  notice (by mail and, when possible, electronically) to each 
repeat offender with the following information:   
 
 
the number and type of each violation recorded by a traffic control signal monitoring 
system, an automated railroad grade crossing enforcement system, a school bus 
monitoring camera, a stop sign monitoring system, a speed monitoring system, or a 
work zone speed control system for which the individual is liable; 
 
the location of each violation; 
 
the location of each system or camera that recorded each violation; 
 
the date and time of the violations; 
 
the requirement to complete an MVA-approved driver accountability and safety 
course in accordance with the bill;  
 
the MVA-approved courses available (including specified information about the 
courses); and 
 
the consequences of failing to comply with the requirements of the bill.  
 
Completion of a Driver Accountability and Safety Course 
 
Generally, each repeat offender must successfully complete an MVA-approved driver 
accountability and safety course within 90 days after receiving the required notice. 
Accordingly, MVA must develop and post on its website a list of the approved courses that 
includes the following information:   
 
 
the language in which each course is provided; 
 
whether a course is in-person or virtual; 
 
the cost of each course; and 
 
the dates of each course. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 8/ Page 3 
The course provider must submit to MVA proof of successful completion, including the 
repeat offender’s driver’s license number or other MVA identifier, within 48 hours after 
course completion. In addition, a repeat offender may upload proof of completion to 
MVA’s website (as MVA must provide an option to do so) or provide proof in person at 
an MVA office. MVA may adopt regulations specifying the file format for uploading 
materials. 
 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
If a repeat offender fails to meet the 90-day course completion requirement, MVA must 
suspend the renewal of the repeat offender’s vehicle registration until the course is 
completed. The suspension must be lifted automatically on receipt of proof of course 
completion. If a repeat offender does not successfully complete the course within 180 days 
after receiving the required notice, the bill authorizes MVA to impound or immobilize the 
repeat offender’s motor vehicle until the individual complies.  
 
However, MVA may grant a waiver from required completion of the course (if specified 
documentation is provided by the owner) under the following circumstances:   
 
 
if the registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before a violation occurred 
and were not under the control or possession of the person at the time of a violation; 
 
if the person was not operating the motor vehicle at the time of a violation; or 
 
if the person was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of a violation. 
 
Low-income Repeat Offenders and Essential Workers  
 
A low-income repeat offender (i.e., a repeat offender with an annual household income that 
is at or below 200% of the federal poverty level) may apply for the following:   
 
 
a waiver or reduction in any applicable driver accountability and safety course fees; 
 
a flexible payment plan for any applicable fines; and 
 
access to online or community-based MVA-approved driver accountability and 
safety courses. 
 
MVA must also establish a hardship appeal process for (1) essential workers and 
(2) individuals from households with no viable transit alternatives to a motor vehicle.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 8/ Page 4 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement Systems  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems (red light cameras), automated railroad grade crossing 
enforcement systems, speed monitoring systems (speed cameras), bus lane monitoring 
systems, school bus monitoring systems, stop sign monitoring systems, vehicle height 
monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
Generally, pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives 
a speed camera citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court.  
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
 
Essential Workers  
 
“Emergency” means a catastrophic health emergency that is the subject of an executive 
proclamation and is related to a communicable disease. “Essential worker” means an 
individual who performs a duty or work responsibility during an emergency that cannot be 
performed remotely or is required to be completed at the worksite and provides services 
that the essential employer determines to be essential or critical to its operations. “Essential 
employer” means a person that employs an essential worker and includes a unit of State or 
local government. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Automated Enforcement Data  
 
MVA advises that it can develop the new Driver Accountability and Safety Course with 
existing resources. However, MVA only receives automated traffic enforcement violations 
notifications from local jurisdictions if the vehicle owner has not satisfied a citation with 
the jurisdiction. In those circumstances, MVA flags the vehicle’s registration which 
prevents renewal until the fine(s) are paid. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 8/ Page 5 
Chapters 463 and 464 of 2025 impose significant limitations on the sharing of automated 
enforcement images (and generally requires a custodian of recorded images produced by 
automated enforcement systems to deny inspection of the images). According to MVA, it 
is unable to receive data related to automated enforcement systems except within the 
narrow limits of the need to place a flag on a vehicle’s registration for nonpayment of a 
citation. 
 
Should these limitations be removed, MVA advises that it would need to develop a method 
to receive all relevant citations from all local jurisdictions operating the applicable type of 
automated enforcement systems. MVA would monitor when a vehicle owner becomes a 
repeat offender (by tracking license plate numbers), send proper notice, flag the registration 
of the vehicle when applicable, and track course completion. 
 
Towing and Impoundment 
 
MVA notes that it has no method in place to impound or immobilize a vehicle with an 
owner who does not complete the course requirements. However, it does have an existing 
process (insurance compliance enforcement) to place an indicator on a vehicle that is 
visible to law enforcement. This indicator orders the registration plates to be seized in the 
event of a traffic stop. 
 
Flag Fee Revenues 
 
Administrative flags are placed on a vehicle’s account by MVA for various reasons, 
including for unpaid fees or fines, and must be cleared before registration (whether initial 
or renewal). Under the bill, MVA must suspend the registration of an individual who fails 
to complete the required course within 90 days. However, the bill explicitly requires MVA 
to lift a suspension automatically upon receipt of proof of course completion. As a result, 
this analysis assumes flag fees will not be assessed for individuals who have their vehicle’s 
registration suspended under the bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Several local jurisdictions indicate that the bill has no fiscal impact. 
However, the Maryland Municipal League advises that local governments may incur 
additional costs due to the bill’s reporting requirements. Currently, local governments 
generally only report automated enforcement data to MVA if a citation has not been 
satisfied. Under the bill, MVA must receive considerably more information on a recurring 
basis. Local governments may need to develop more robust reporting systems to provide 
the information specified in the bill (e.g., location, date and time, etc.), potentially resulting 
in additional administrative costs and staff time. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 8/ Page 6 
Small Business Effect:  Small business driving schools may benefit from the 
establishment of a new driver safety course, depending on the level at which MVA sets the 
course fee and how many individuals participate. 
 
Additional Comments:  As noted above, the bill authorizes a low-income repeat offender 
to apply for a “flexible payment plan for any applicable fines.” However, it is unclear what 
fines this provision might apply to. Because automated enforcement violations are 
generally paid directly to the local jurisdiction operating the system, there is no existing 
system in place to manage payment plans for all local automated enforcement citations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Montgomery, 
and 
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 8/ Page 7 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County. 
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. 
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system; 
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program; 
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 8/ Page 8 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8