START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 62 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 62 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Summons for Actions to Repossess for Failure to Pay 
Rent - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters certain procedures associated with the issuance of a summons in failure to 
pay rent cases in Anne Arundel County. Specifically, the bill (1) requires the District Court 
to issue its summons in failure to pay rent cases to constables and/or sheriff’s designees; 
(2) requires the constable/designee to notify the tenant, assignee, or subtenant by first class 
mail to answer the complaint and appear before the District Court at the trial to be held on 
the thirtieth day after the filing of the complaint; (3) grants the sheriff’s designee the same 
authority and responsibilities as a constable or sheriff when handling cases involving a 
failure to pay rent action; and (4) requires a sheriff’s designee to post a trial notice at the 
subject property involved in the dispute at least seven days before the trial. The bill also 
restricts the District Court from ordering a constable or sheriff’s designee to serve process 
to appear before the District Court in a failure to pay rent matter if a specific threshold of 
matters before the District Court that day is exceeded. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although there may be an operational impact, as discussed below, the bill is 
not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential decrease in Anne Arundel County expenditures to the extent that 
the bill results in operational efficiencies related to service processing. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 62/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant must file the appropriate 
action (e.g., failure to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a 
judgment by the court, the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and 
signed by the court, authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution, which must comply 
with specific requirements, are forwarded to the local sheriff’s office who is then 
authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth numerous specific requirements for 
such actions, including those related to written notice prior to filing certain actions. This 
includes specific requirements for written notice prior to initiating a failure to pay rent 
action. 
 
Prior to filing a failure to pay rent claim with the court, a landlord is required to provide 
the tenant with a 10‐day written notice of intent to file, as specified. Following the notice 
period, the landlord may then file the written complaint in the District Court of the county 
where the property is located. In a failure to pay rent case, the District Court must issue its 
summons – directed to any constable or sheriff in the county entitled to serve  
process – ordering the constable/sheriff to notify the tenant, assignee, or subtenant by  
first‐class mail to appear before the District Court at the trial to be held on the fifth day 
after the filing of the complaint. 
 
In failure to pay rent actions, a tenant has the right to redemption of the leased premises by 
tendering in cash, certified check, or money order to the landlord or the landlord’s agent 
all past due amounts, as determined by the court, plus all court awarded costs and fees, at 
any time before actual execution of the eviction order. This right of redemption does not 
apply to any tenant against whom three judgments of possession have been entered for rent 
due and unpaid in the 12 months prior to the initiation of the action, as specified. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary anticipates moderate operational impacts 
associated with scheduling cases and advises that failure to pay rent cases represent a high 
volume of cases handled in Anne Arundel County. Specifically, the Judiciary reports that 
during fiscal 2025, 22,302 failure to pay rent cases were filled in the county. The Judiciary 
notes that under the bill, the District Court is prohibited from directing a constable or 
sheriff’s designee to serve process to appear before the District Court in a matter under the 
bill for a given day if the number of matters on that day exceeds 100. The Judiciary reports 
that in the Annapolis District Court there will almost always be more than 100 matters on 
any given day, and the bill does not address whether this threshold only pertains to 
landlord/tenant matters. 
 
Anne Arundel County reports that the bill may allow its Sheriff’s office to more effectively 
provide service within legal time limits, thereby potentially reducing overtime costs that 
currently occur. Any such impact cannot be reliably quantified in advance.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 62/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3