START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 35 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 35 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Local Government - Regulatory Powers - Regulation of Tree of Heaven 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to regulate (through an 
ordinance) trees of heaven, including by prohibiting a person from:  (1) selling trees of 
heaven; (2) planting trees of heaven; and (3) allowing trees of heaven to grow on the 
person’s property. The bill authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to 
establish a bounty program to incentivize the removal of trees of heaven. The bill also 
authorizes the governing body of a county or municipality to provide for the enforcement 
of an ordinance adopted under the bill by requiring any damages caused by trees of heaven 
to be mitigated and establishing a civil fine. The bill defines “tree of heaven” as the 
Ailanthus altissima tree species. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature. The impact on local government finances 
depends on the extent to which bounty programs and fines are established, as discussed 
below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 589 and 590 of 2024 significantly altered the regulatory approach 
for controlling invasive plant species in the State by repealing the existing two-tiered 
regulatory approach and establishing a regulatory approach that generally involves:  
(1) assessments of nonnative plant species by expert assessors to determine the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 35/ Page 2 
invasiveness rank of each such species; (2) the review of such assessments and related data; 
and (3) the determination by the Secretary of the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA) whether such species should be classified as prohibited invasive plants and 
included on a Consolidated List of Maryland Invasive Plant Species or placed on a watch 
list. 
 
MDA and the Department of Natural Resources must each post the Consolidated List of 
Maryland Invasive Plant Species and the watch list on their respective websites. The 
University of Maryland Extension must post a link to those lists on its website. MDA must 
also annually distribute the lists to nurseries, plant dealers, and plant brokers. 
 
Regulation of Invasive Bamboo 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may regulate (through an ordinance) 
invasive bamboo, including prohibiting a person from:  (1) selling invasive bamboo; 
(2) planting invasive bamboo; and (3) allowing invasive bamboo to grow on the property 
of the person without proper upkeep and appropriate containment measures, including 
barriers or trenches. The governing body of a county or municipality is also authorized to 
provide for the enforcement of an ordinance adopted to regulate invasive bamboo by 
requiring any damages caused by invasive bamboo to be mitigated and establishing a civil 
fine. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent local governments adopt the bounty program authorized 
by the bill, expenditures may increase to account for administering the program and paying 
out bounties. To the extent a local government implements a fine authorized by the bill, 
local revenues may increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses 
depending upon whether a county or municipal government decides to regulate trees of 
heaven. Additional local regulations may (1) negatively affect small businesses that incur 
costs to comply with potential restrictions pertaining to trees of heaven and (2) positively 
benefit landscaping businesses that are hired to remove or contain trees of heaven. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 266 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 35/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Baltimore, Frederick, and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
Revised - Correction - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3