START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 95 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 95 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Marriage License Applications - Appearance in Court 
 
   
This bill requires both parties to appear before the court clerk to apply for a marriage 
license, as otherwise specified in statute.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially impact the operations or finances of 
the Judiciary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially impact the operations or finances of the circuit 
courts.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute establishes certain procedures for individuals seeking to obtain a 
marriage license. In order to apply for a marriage license, one of the parties to be married 
must:   
 
 
appear before a court clerk and give, under oath, specified information that must be 
placed on an application form by the clerk, including (1) the full name of each party; 
(2) the place of residence of each party; and (3) the date of birth of each party;  
 
sign the application form; and  
 
provide the clerk with the Social Security Number of each party who has one and a 
copy of an official government-issued birth certificate or other official 
government‑issued document or record demonstrating the age of each party. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 95/ Page 2 
If the parties to be married are not residents of the county where the marriage ceremony is 
to be performed, the clerk must accept, instead of the application described above, an 
affidavit from one of the parties to be married, as otherwise specified in statute.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 355 (Senator Ready) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2