START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 99 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 99 
(Delegates Schindler and Fair) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Municipalities - Annexed Land - Land Use and Density 
 
 
This bill alters the standard used to determine the extent to which a municipality may allow 
development of annexed land for different and higher density uses, within five years of 
annexation, without express approval of the county. Under the bill, a municipality may not 
allow development, under those circumstances, for land uses substantially different or at 
substantially higher density than could be granted under land use recommendations in the 
comprehensive plan of the county or municipality applicable at the time of the annexation 
(under current law, the use or density is instead evaluated against the zoning classification 
of the county applicable at the time of the annexation). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Counties and municipalities may be affected, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Municipal Annexation 
 
A municipality may enlarge its boundaries by annexation of land, subject to various criteria 
and procedures established in Title 4, Subtitle 4 of the Local Government Article, including 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 99/ Page 2 
adoption of an annexation plan (a plan for providing municipal services to the annexed 
area) and enactment of an annexation resolution. 
 
Development After Annexation 
 
If an area is annexed to a municipality that has planning and zoning authority at the time 
of annexation, the municipality has exclusive jurisdiction over planning, subdivision 
control, and zoning in the area annexed. However, without the express approval of the 
county commissioners or county council of the county in which the municipality is located, 
for five years after an annexation by a municipality, the municipality may not allow 
development of the annexed land for land uses substantially different than the authorized 
use, or at a substantially higher density, not exceeding 50%, than could be granted for the 
proposed development, in accordance with the zoning classification of the county 
applicable at the time of the annexation. 
 
Comprehensive Plan – Municipal Growth Element  
 
Local jurisdictions that exercise planning and zoning authority are required to enact, adopt, 
amend, and execute a comprehensive plan that must contain certain elements, including, 
for a municipality, a municipal growth element, which addresses the municipality’s future 
growth and related infrastructure.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Counties and municipalities may be meaningfully affected to the 
extent the bill allows municipalities, within five years of annexation of land, to authorize 
development uses and densities that are not otherwise possible, as a result of those uses 
and densities being evaluated, under the bill, against the land use recommendations in the 
municipality’s comprehensive plan rather than, under current law, against the county’s 
zoning classification for the land. Municipalities may benefit to the extent developments 
allowed under the bill help to achieve municipal objectives for growth and 
economic/community development. Counties, however, may be negatively affected to the 
extent the higher density growth on recently annexed land places an unplanned for burden 
on surrounding county infrastructure or services.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may meaningfully benefit from development of 
annexed land by a municipality that otherwise does not occur, or occurs later, in the absence 
of the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 751 of 2025. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 99/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Cities of 
Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3