START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 47 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 47 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Commission on State and Local Government Real Property Bearing Confederate 
Names - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission on State and Local Government Real Property 
Bearing Confederate Names as an independent unit in the Executive Branch of State 
government. The commission must (1) hire an archivist; (2) develop and implement a 
framework to identify real property bearing a Confederate name that is owned by the State 
or a political subdivision; and (3) make recommendations regarding the real property that 
should be renamed. By October 1, 2033, the commission must report its findings and 
recommendations to specified entities. The bill takes effect July 1, 2027, and terminates 
June 30, 2034. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $89,100 in 
FY 2028 for staffing; future years reflect ongoing costs and inflation. Revenues are not 
affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
89,100 
85,900 
89,900 
93,800 
Net Effect 
$0 
($89,100) 
($85,900) 
($89,900) 
($93,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 47/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Confederate name” means any name that commemorates or references 
any aspect of the states in rebellion operating as the Confederate States of America (CSA) 
from 1861 through 1865 or any person or entity that served voluntarily with or on behalf 
of CSA in any military or civilian capacity. “Political subdivision” means (1) a county; 
(2) a municipal corporation; (3) an unincorporated town; (4) a school district; (5) a special 
district; or (6) the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission. 
 
The commission consists of 24 members appointed by the Governor with the advice and 
consent of the Senate. The Governor must appoint one representative of each county. The 
Governor may remove a member for incompetence or misconduct. The commission must 
elect a chair and vice chair annually from among its members. A member of the 
commission may not receive compensation as a member of the commission but is entitled 
to reimbursement for expenses as provided in the State budget. 
 
The commission must meet at least quarterly, and at the discretion of the chair or the 
Governor. 
 
The archivist hired by the commission must be an employee of the Maryland State 
Archives (MSA). 
 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to authorize the commission to rename real property 
owned by the State or a political subdivision. 
 
The commission may seek money from the federal government, foundations, and private 
sources in addition to State financing. The commission may accept gifts, grants, donations, 
requests, or endowments for any of its purposes. Money received and income and fees 
derived from educational materials and activities of the commission are not subject to 
reversion to the general fund. Money maintained is subject to audit by the State, including 
by the Legislative Auditor. 
 
Current Law:  There is no relevant State law regarding the prohibition or renaming of real 
property referencing CSA. However, the Commission on the Naming of Items of the 
Department of Defense that Commemorate the Confederate States of America or Any 
Person Who Served Voluntarily with the Confederate States of America (Naming 
Commission) was established following the enactment of the federal fiscal 2021 National 
Defense Authorization Act. Among other things, the Naming Commission was tasked with 
creating a list to identify specified names and information within the U.S. Department of 
Defense that commemorate CSA or any person who served voluntarily with CSA, 
including names, symbols, displays, monuments, or paraphernalia that commemorate CSA. 
The Naming Commission published three reports, and they can be read here.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 47/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  No effect in fiscal 2027 as the bill and the mandated appropriation 
that MSA hire an archivist to staff the commission both take effect beginning in 
fiscal 2028. Moreover, although the commission is temporary, its duration extends beyond 
four years, so this analysis assumes that a regular, rather than contractual, position is 
needed. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $89,123 in fiscal 2028, which reflects 
the bill’s delayed July 1, 2027 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one archivist to staff the commission and produce the necessary report. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$79,260 
Operating Expenses 
     9,863 
Total FY 2028 State Expenditures 
$89,123 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual salary increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This analysis does not include an estimate of any federal funds, foundation funding, private 
fund, or other donated funding and materials collected by the commission. 
 
The Office of Legislative Audits can audit the commission with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 752 of 2025 and HB 566 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Governor’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland State Archives; 
Department of Legislative Services - Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3