START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 22 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 22 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Correctional Services - Incarcerated Individuals - Identification Cards and 
Driver's Licenses 
 
 
This bill requires a State or local correctional facility to return an incarcerated individual’s 
identification (ID) card or driver’s license at or before the individual’s release from 
confinement if the incarcerated individual entered the correctional facility with a valid 
photo ID card issued by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) or a driver’s license. 
Six months before the anticipated release from confinement of an incarcerated individual 
who is serving a sentence of one year or more in a State or local correctional facility, the 
Commissioner of Correction and the managing official of a local correctional facility must 
provide the appropriate forms to and work with the incarcerated individual to ensure that a 
photo ID card issued by MVA or a driver’s license is available to the incarcerated 
individual at the time of release from confinement. This requirement may be satisfied by 
the return of a valid ID card or driver’s license to an incarcerated individual, as provided 
by the bill. The bill’s provisions may not be construed in a manner that in any way delays 
the release from confinement of an incarcerated individual.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances.    
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect local government 
operations or finances.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None.    
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 22/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Correctional Facilities 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must issue an ID card to an incarcerated individual before 
release from confinement in a State correctional facility. The ID card must meet the 
requirements for secondary identification for the purpose of an ID card issued by MVA 
under § 12-301 of the Transportation Article. In addition, pursuant to Chapter 514 of 2020, 
the Commissioner of Correction must obtain an incarcerated individual’s birth certificate 
and Social Security card after taking custody of an incarcerated individual (unless the 
incarcerated individual does not consent). 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning the issuance of an ID card to incarcerated 
individuals on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Local Correctional Facilities 
 
Chapter 514 requires each local correctional facility to develop and implement a policy for 
assisting incarcerated individuals to obtain ID cards issued by MVA, as specified, either 
before or after release from confinement. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) advises that, through an interagency agreement with MVA, it has established a 
procedure for assisting incarcerated individuals with the process of obtaining MVA-issued 
ID cards prior to their release from State correctional facilities. DPSCS notes that before 
an MVA-issued ID card can be requested, an incarcerated individual must have both their 
birth certificate and Social Security card. DPSCS further reports that it has a memorandum 
of understanding with the Maryland Department of Health’s Division of Vital Records and 
the Social Security Administration to facilitate this process.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 22/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3