START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 37 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 37 
(Delegate Schindler) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
General Assembly - Employment and Leave Protection for Members 
 
 
This bill prohibits an employer from (1) depriving an employee who is a member of the 
General Assembly of employment or coerce, intimidate, or threaten to discharge an 
individual because the individual loses employment time to performing responsibilities as 
a member of the General Assembly, or exercises a right to refrain from work, as specified; 
(2) requiring an individual who spent at least 4 hours, including travel time, to perform 
responsibilities as a member of the General Assembly to work specified early morning or 
nighttime employment shifts; or (3) requiring an employee who is a member of the 
General Assembly to use the employee’s annual, sick, or vacation leave to perform 
responsibilities as a member. “Responsibilities as a member of the General Assembly” 
does not include campaigning on behalf of a member or another candidate for elected 
office. The prohibition applies regardless of whether the General Assembly is in session. 
An employer who violates the bill’s provisions is subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any increase in general or special fund expenditures is expected to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing resources. Potential minimal increase in general 
fund revenues due to the bill’s penalty provision for cases heard in the District Court. No 
effect on expenditures.   
  
Local Effect:  Any increase in local governmental expenditures is expected to be minimal 
and absorbable within existing resources. Potential minimal increase in revenues due to the 
bill’s penalty provision for cases heard in the circuit courts. No effect on expenditures. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 37/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  While the General Assembly is in session, each member or employee of 
the General Assembly who also is employed by the State or any of its political subdivisions 
(1) is entitled automatically to a leave of absence from the other employment, and 
(2) except for a right to a salary or wages, may not be deprived of or otherwise have 
impaired any incident of the employment, including tenure, seniority, annual or sick leave, 
promotional rights, or rights to salary increments. 
 
Additional Comment:  The Department of Budget and Management advises that as of 
February 2026, there are six employees in the State Personnel Management System who 
are also members of the General Assembly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2