START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 72 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 72 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Natural Resources - Edible Forests and Foraging Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes an Edible Forests and Foraging Program in the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) to (1) designate foraging areas; (2) authorize and regulate foraging 
within designated foraging areas; and (3) facilitate the establishment and maintenance of 
edible forests. The bill requires individuals to obtain a foraging permit in order to forage 
within a designated foraging area (no permit is required to forage in an edible forest). The 
bill also establishes an Edible Forests and Foraging Fund, administered by DNR, to support 
the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and/or special fund expenditures increase, beginning in FY 2027, 
as discussed below. DNR estimates that initial costs to establish an edible forest are 
approximately $10,000 per acre. Special fund revenues increase, beginning in FY 2027, by 
an indeterminate amount due to collection of fee revenues. General fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through FY 2028.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the Edible Forests and Foraging Program is to  
(1) designate foraging areas; (2) authorize and regulate foraging within designated foraging 
areas; and (3) facilitate the establishment and maintenance of edible forests.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 72/ Page 2 
Definitions 
 
“Designated foraging area” means department-owned land designated by DNR for 
foraging. 
 
“Edible forest” means State-owned land that is cultivated for harvesting noninvasive plants 
for noncommercial personal consumption.  
 
“Foraging” means harvesting mushrooms or plant materials such as seeds, nuts, roots, 
tubers, and berries, for noncommercial personal consumption. Foraging does not include 
harvesting threatened or endangered plant species. 
 
Foraging Permit for Designated Foraging Areas 
 
The bill requires individuals to obtain a foraging permit to forage within a designated 
foraging area. An individual must submit an application to DNR and pay an application 
fee, set by DNR, in order to obtain a foraging permit. The permit is valid for one year after 
the issuance date. The bill authorizes DNR to require individuals to successfully complete 
an orientation or a foraging course before receiving a permit. The bill also requires the 
department to waive the permit application fee for individuals who demonstrate financial 
need. DNR must adopt implementing regulations, including regulations (1) designating 
foraging areas on department-owned land; (2) establishing a foraging permit application 
fee; and (3) establishing a fee waiver process for individuals who demonstrate financial 
need. 
 
Edible Forests 
 
Subject to available funding, DNR must establish and maintain edible forests on  
State-owned land. The department is prohibited from requiring individuals to obtain 
foraging permits to forage in an edible forest. 
 
Edible Forests and Foraging Fund 
 
The bill requires DNR to administer an Edible Forests and Foraging Fund, which consists 
of foraging permit application fees, money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, 
interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. The purpose of the fund is to support (1) the designation of foraging areas and  
(2) the cultivation of noninvasive plants on State-owned land to be used as edible forests. 
The fund may only be used for (1) designating, planting, and maintaining designated 
foraging areas and edible forests and (2) administrative expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 72/ Page 3 
Current Law:  DNR is responsible, under the Natural Resources Article, for 
(1) promoting, administering, and managing every State-owned or leased forest, park, 
scenic preserve, natural area, parkway, historic monument, and recreation area, and 
(2) administering every law and regulation relating to those resources. The Natural 
Resources Article also contains a General Assembly finding that forests, streams, valleys, 
wetlands, parks, and scenic, historic, and recreation areas of the State are basic assets, and 
their proper use, development, and preservation are necessary to protect and promote the 
health, safety, economy, and general welfare of the people of the State. 
 
Current statute and regulations do not directly address designation and use of State-owned 
land for foraging by individuals. The DNR Lands Acreage Report (see link on this page) 
describes the various types of public lands the department owns and manages. 
 
State Expenditures:  General and/or special fund expenditures increase, beginning in 
fiscal 2027, to establish an initial edible forest under the program. DNR estimates that the 
cost to establish an edible forest plot on State land is approximately $10,000 per acre for 
site preparation, tree/shrub installation, and initial maintenance. It is assumed, for the 
purposes of this fiscal and policy note, that the program is administered by existing DNR 
staff at first; however, depending on the level of interest in the program, additional staff 
may be needed to expand and maintain the program. The cost of hiring one additional 
natural resources technician in fiscal 2028, for context, totals approximately $75,223. To 
the extent fee revenues from foraging permits are not sufficient to cover the costs of the 
program, general funds are required. 
 
State Revenues:   
 
Special Funds 
 
Special fund revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, reflecting foraging permit fee 
revenues; however, the level of interest in the program and associated fee revenues, cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
General Funds 
 
Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund remain in the fund, 
the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, that 
interest earnings from special funds or accounts (with certain exceptions) accrue to the 
general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through fiscal 2028. The fund is 
exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 72/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 317 and HB 257 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4