START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 63 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 63 
(Delegate Szeliga, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Interscholastic and Intramural Junior Varsity and Varsity Teams 
and Locker Rooms - Designation Based on Sex (Fairness in Girls' Sports Act) 
 
 
This bill requires an interscholastic or intramural athletic team or sport that is sponsored 
by a public or certain nonpublic high school to be expressly designated as one of the 
following based on biological sex:  (1) a boys’, male, or men’s team or sport; (2) a girls’, 
female, or women’s team or sport; or (3) a coeducational or mixed team or sport. An 
interscholastic or intramural athletic team or sport designated for girls, females, or women 
may not include students of the male sex. Schools subject to the bill must expressly 
designate a locker room as (1) a boys’, male, or men’s locker room or (2) a girls’, female, 
or women’s locker room. A locker room used by an interscholastic or intramural junior 
varsity athletic team designated for girls, females, or women may not be used by students 
of the male sex. A governmental entity, a licensing or accrediting organization, or an 
athletic association or organization may not accept a complaint, investigate, or take any 
other adverse action against a school for maintaining separate interscholastic or intramural 
athletic teams or sports or locker rooms designated for students of the female sex. Students 
and schools may bring specified civil actions. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems may incur additional costs related to (1) civil actions 
brought and (2) potentially locker room modifications under the bill, but a reliable estimate 
of any such effect is not feasible absent experience under the bill. Local school systems 
can update sports eligibility policies and guidelines using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 63/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Student of the female sex” means a student whose biological sex is 
female; “student of the male sex” means a student whose biological sex is male. “Locker 
room” means a dedicated space where a student can change clothes and store belongings 
and where partial or full disrobing is expected. 
 
A student who is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any harm resulting from a 
violation of the bill’s provisions may bring a civil action against the student’s school. A 
student who is subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school or an athletic 
association or organization resulting from reporting a violation of the bill’s provisions to 
(1) an employee or representative of the aforementioned entities, or (2) any State or federal 
agency with oversight of schools in the State, may bring a civil action against the school 
or athletic association or organization. An individual prevailing in a civil action under the 
bill may recover monetary damages, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, and any other 
relief, including an injunction, as the court deems appropriate. 
 
A school that suffers any harm from a governmental entity, a licensing or accrediting 
organization, or an athletic association or organization as a result of a violation of the bill 
may bring a civil action against any of those entities. 
 
If any provision of the bill or the application of any provision of the bill to any person or 
circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction (1) the 
provision must be construed to give the provision the maximum effect permitted by law 
unless the provision is held to be absolutely invalid, and (2) the invalidity does not affect 
other provisions or any other application of the bill. The provisions of the bill are declared 
severable. 
 
Current Law:  State regulations under the Maryland State Department of Education govern 
the athletic programs for all high school students in Maryland public secondary schools, 
which are members of the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association 
(MPSSAA). Local school systems may adopt rules governing their athletic programs that 
are more restrictive than those of MPSSAA. Under State regulations, students may not be 
excluded on the basis of sex from overall equal opportunity to participate in athletic 
programs. If a school sponsors a team in a particular sport for members of one sex but 
sponsors no such team for members of the opposite sex, and before July 1, 1975, overall 
opportunities for members of the excluded sex have been limited, the excluded sex must be 
allowed to try out for the team. 
 
Under Chapter 739 of 2022, public and publicly funded schools and programs may not 
discriminate against a current student, a prospective student, or the parent or guardian of a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 63/ Page 3 
current or prospective student on the basis of race, ethnicity, color, religion, sex, age, 
national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability.  
 
Under federal law – Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) – 
discrimination on the basis of sex in educational programs and activities is prohibited for 
educational institutions receiving federal funding. Every institution that receives federal 
financial assistance is bound by Title IX; however, an educational institution that is 
controlled by a religious organization is exempt from Title IX when the law’s requirements 
conflict with the organization’s religious tenets. 
 
In April 2024, the U.S. Department of Education issued regulations related to Title IX, 
effective August 1, 2024, which in part specified that prohibited discrimination on the basis 
of sex includes discrimination on the basis of sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, 
pregnancy or related conditions, sexual orientation, and gender identity. However, in 
June 2024, in the case of State of Tennessee et al. v. Miguel Cardona et al. (Civil Action 
No. 2:24‐072‐DCR), a U.S. District Court judge granted a preliminary injunction against 
the regulations’ enforcement in six plaintiff states (not including Maryland). Following a 
July 2024 denial of the department’s motion for partial stay pending appeal, the 
U.S. District Court judge found on January 9, 2025, that the regulations and associated 
final rule are invalid because they exceed the department’s authority under Title IX, violate 
the U.S. Constitution, and are the result of arbitrary and capricious agency action. 
 
The court opinion states that, “when Title IX is viewed in its entirety, it is abundantly clear 
that discrimination on the basis of sex means discrimination on the basis of being a male 
or female” and that “expanding the meaning of ‘on the basis of sex’ to include ‘gender 
identity’ turns Title IX on its head.” As its remedy, the District Court ruling vacates 
nationwide the rule and regulations that took effect August 1, 2024. 
 
On February 5, 2025, President Donald J. Trump issued an executive order, citing 
Tennessee v. Cardona, and asserting that it is the “policy of the United States to rescind all 
funds from educational programs that deprive women and girls of fair athletic 
opportunities, which results in the endangerment, humiliation, and silencing of women and 
girls and deprives them of privacy.” The order directs the U.S. Secretary of Education to 
“take all appropriate action to affirmatively protect all-female athletic opportunities and 
all-female locker rooms and thereby provide the equal opportunity guaranteed by Title IX.” 
 
However, Maryland is among several states engaged in legal disputes with the federal 
government related to its rescinding and withholding of education funding provided to the 
states and local governments by Congress. A U.S. District Court granted the state of Maine 
a temporary restraining order in April 2025, commanding the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) and its Secretary to cease terminating, freezing, or otherwise 
interfering with the State’s access to federal funds based on alleged Title IX violations 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 63/ Page 4 
without following the process required by federal statute, and ordering relevant funding to 
be unfrozen and released. A settlement of the dispute, agreeing to similar (though not 
explicitly temporary) terms between USDA, the Secretary, and state of Maine was 
announced May 2, 2025.  
 
Relevant cases are also pending nationwide; two were recently heard by the 
U. S. Supreme Court on January 13, 2026. For instance, West Virginia v. B.P.J. revolves 
around a dispute regarding West Virginia’s Fairness in Women’s Sports Act, which 
prohibits athletic teams or sports designated for females, women, or girls from being open 
to students of the male sex and defines “male” as an individual whose biological sex 
determined at birth is male. The case involves B.P.J., a high school student who (1) has 
publicly identified as female since the third grade; (2) takes medicine to stave off the onset 
of male puberty and has also begun to receive hormone therapy with estrogen; (3) 
expressed interest in trying out for the middle school girls’ cross-country and track teams; 
and (4) was informed that the State law barred B.P.J.’s from participating on the girls’ 
middle school sports team. 
 
Although an initial order temporarily barred West Virginia from enforcing its law against 
B.P.J., thereby allowing B.P.J. to compete while the litigation progressed, the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia, on January 5, 2023, issued 
summary judgement in the state’s favor. However, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals 
held that the court erred in granting the state’s motions for summary judgment and in failing 
to grant summary judgment to B.P.J. on her specific Title IX claim. The majority found 
that because “B.P.J. can show both worse treatment based on sex and resulting harm, she 
has established each of the disputed requirements for a Title IX claim.”  
 
In Grimm v. Gloucester County School Board, 972 F.3d 586 (2020), a transgender male in 
Virginia filed suit alleging that (among other complaints) the school board's bathroom 
policy, which excluded him from the boys’ bathrooms, violated the Equal Protection 
Clause and constituted discrimination on the basis of sex in violation of Title IX. The 
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held on August 26, 2020, that the policy constitutes 
sex‑based discrimination, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause and that the bathroom 
policy discriminated against the plaintiff on the basis of sex, further holding that plaintiff 
suffered legally cognizable harm based on the unlawful discrimination in violation of 
Title IX. The Grimm decision was recognized as recently as September 2025 as the law of 
the Fourth Circuit; however, other cases addressing the issue of transgender athletes in 
locker rooms are being considered.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 63/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 156 of 2025; HB 47 and SB 381 of 2024; and HB 359 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland 
Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
State Department of Education; SCOTUSblog; JUSTIA; Education Week; The Hill; 
Federal Register; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5