START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 59 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 59 
(Delegate Addison) 
Economic Matters and Judiciary 
 
 
Real Property - Expedited Wrongful Detainer Proceedings - Property for Sale or 
Lease 
 
 
This bill establishes an expedited process for wrongful detainer actions if the property that 
is the subject of the complaint is, at the time of the complaint, advertised for sale or lease 
or listed for sale or lease on a local multiple listing service.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although there may be an operational impact to the extent a significant 
number of expedited hearings are required under the bill’s provisions, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Although there may be an operational impact to the extent a significant 
number of expedited hearings are required under the bill’s provisions (with associated 
impacts on sheriffs’ offices to immediately execute warrants of restitution), the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a property is subject to the expedited process under the bill, the 
District Court must immediately summon the person in actual possession of the property 
to appear before the court at a hearing to take place no more than five days after the filing 
of the complaint. If the person in actual possession cannot be found, the person authorized 
to serve process must post an attested copy of the summons conspicuously on the property. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 59/ Page 2 
The District Court must issue a ruling on the complaint within two business days after the 
hearing. 
 
An appeal must be filed with the appropriate circuit court, as specified, within two business 
days after the District Court enters a judgment. The circuit court must set a hearing date 
within three business days after the application for appeal and must immediately serve, in 
person, notice of the order for the hearing on the parties or the parties’ counsels. The 
judgment of the circuit court must be issued within two business days after the hearing. 
 
If the District Court, or the circuit court in the event of an appeal, rules in favor of the 
complainant, a warrant must be issued by the court to the sheriff within 24 hours after the 
ruling. The sheriff must then immediately execute the warrant and return the property to 
the complainant. 
 
Current Law:  Wrongful detainer means to hold possession of real property without the 
right to do so. A wrongful detainer action is not available if (1) the person in actual 
possession of the property has been granted possession under a court order; (2) a remedy 
is available under general landlord/tenant law; or (3) any other exclusive means to recover 
possession is provided by statute or rule. Generally, if a person holds possession of a 
property to which the person is not entitled, a person claiming possession (complainant) 
may file a complaint, in writing, with the District Court. Once the court receives a 
complaint, the court must immediately summon the person in possession of the property to 
appear before the court on the day specified in the summons to show why the court should 
not restore possession of the property to the complainant. The hearing must be held within 
10 business days after the complaint is filed. If the court determines the complainant is 
legally entitled to possession, the court must give judgment for restitution of the property 
to the complainant and direct the sheriff to deliver possession of the property to the 
complainant. 
 
Either party may appeal the decision to the circuit court for the county where the property 
is located within 10 days of the decision of the District Court. In that case, the person in 
actual possession of the property may retain possession until the appeal is decided if he or 
she (1) files an affidavit that the appeal is not taken for delay and (2) files a bond 
conditioned on diligent prosecution of the appeal or pays to the original plaintiff or into the 
court:   
 
 
the fair rental value of the property for the entire period of possession up to the date 
of judgment; 
 
all court costs in the case; 
 
all other losses or damages as determined by the court; and 
 
the fair rental value of the property during the appeal. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 59/ Page 3 
The circuit court must set a date for a hearing no less than 5 days or more than 15 days 
after the application for appeal and meet specified notice requirements. If the circuit court 
decides in favor of the original plaintiff, the court must instruct the sheriff to immediately 
return possession of the property to the original plaintiff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 271 of 2025 and HB 757 of 2023. 
 
Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3