START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 27 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 27 
(Delegate Wims) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Long COVID Innovation 
Grant and Loan Program 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) to 
establish a program to provide grant and loans for State-funded Long COVID innovation. 
The bill also establishes a related special, nonlapsing fund to award grants and loans for 
eligible Long COVID research. By January 1 each year, TEDCO must report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on the progress of the Long COVID innovation 
conducted with funding awarded under the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2027 to capitalize the fund; special fund revenues and expenditures increase 
correspondingly. Higher education revenues and expenditures increase to the extent public 
four‑year institutions of higher education receive and spend grants or loans (not shown 
below). Special fund revenues also increase to the extent any loans made are repaid. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
GF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
SF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
Net Effect 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 27/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:      
 
Definitions 
 
“Committee” means the independent scientific peer review committee with which TEDCO 
contracts. 
 
“Long COVID” has the meaning (1) established by the National Academy of Sciences in 
A Long COVID Definition:  ‘A Chronic, Systemic Disease State with Profound 
Consequences,’ published in 2024, or (2) if the National Academy of Sciences 
subsequently amends the definition, the meaning most recently established and published 
by the National Academy of Sciences. 
 
“Long COVID innovation” means research, product development, and manufacturing in 
the State related to treatment of Long COVID and conducted with money from the 
Maryland Long COVID Research Fund.   
 
Grant and Loan Program 
 
TEDCO must (1) develop criteria, standards, and requirements for the review of 
applications for a program grant or loan; (2) review, evaluate, rank, and rate research 
proposals for State-funded Long COVID innovation grants and loans based on procedures 
and guidelines established by TEDCO; (3) based on recommendations by the committee, 
award and disburse grants and loans from the fund; (4) establish standards for the oversight 
and use of grants and loans awarded under the program; (5) conduct progress oversight 
reviews of grant and loan recipients and rescind funds if TEDCO determines that a grant 
recipient is failing to meet the established goals of the funded project; and (6) develop 
policies and procedures governing conflicts of interest by committee members, including 
policies and procedures for disclosure and recusal. TEDCO may consult with experts in 
performing its duties. 
 
TEDCO must adopt regulations to (1) establish procedures for awarding and making the 
disbursement of a grant or loan under the program; (2) establish policies addressing 
conflicts of interest for members of the committee; and (3) carry out its duties, as specified 
in the bill. 
 
Committee Responsibilities 
 
TEDCO must contract with an independent review committee composed of scientific 
experts in the field of Long COVID innovation.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 27/ Page 3 
The committee must review, evaluate, rank, and rate research proposals for State-funded 
Long COVID innovation (1) based on the procedures and guidelines established by 
TEDCO and (2) in a manner that gives due consideration to the scientific, medical, and 
ethical implications of the research. Based on the rankings and ratings awarded to the 
research proposals, the committee must also make recommendations to TEDCO for the 
award and disbursement of grants and loans.  
 
A member of the committee (1) is not eligible to receive a grant or loan for State-funded 
Long COVID innovation from the fund and (2) is subject to the policies and procedures 
governing conflicts of interest established by TEDCO.  
 
Maryland Long COVID Research Fund 
 
The Maryland Long COVID Research Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund with the purpose 
of promoting State-funded life sciences research, development, commercialization, and 
manufacturing in Maryland related to Long COVID through grants and loans to public and 
private entities in the State. TEDCO must administer the fund. 
 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any 
other money from any other source accepted for its benefit. Money in the fund may be used 
only to award grants and loans for State-funded Long COVID innovation and pay the costs 
necessary to administer the fund. Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the 
fund. Each fiscal year, the Governor may include in the annual budget an appropriation to 
the fund. Expenditures from the fund may only be made in accordance with the State 
budget.  
 
Reporting 
 
By January 1 each year, TEDCO must report to the Governor and the General Assembly 
on the progress of the Long COVID innovation conducted with grants or loans awarded 
under the program. The report must identify (1) each recipient of a grant or loan awarded 
under the program; (2) the amount of funding awarded to each recipient; (3) a description 
of the type of State-funded Long COVID innovation conducted by the recipient; 
(4) indicators of the economic impact of grants and loans made from the fund; and (5) any 
recommendations for improving the overall effectiveness of the program. 
 
Current Law:    
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Generally 
 
TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 
to enhance the transfer of technology from universities and federal laboratories to the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 27/ Page 4 
private sector and foster the growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. 
TEDCO investments must meet statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a 
business to have and subsequently maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs 
typically assist companies based on a company’s stage of development, from early stage 
and technology transfer to growth stage.  
 
Maryland Stem Cell Research Commission and Fund 
 
The Stem Cell Research Commission is an independent commission that functions within 
TEDCO, with its members including individuals with experience in biotechnology, 
scientists, bioethicists, and individuals with expertise in biomedical ethics as it relates to 
religion. The commission is assisted in reviewing proposals for stem cell research by 
contracting with an independent scientific peer review committee composed of recognized 
experts in such research. The commission must, among other things, (1) develop criteria, 
standards, and requirements for the initial review of grant and loan applications by the 
commission; (2) establish procedures and guidelines to be used by the committee for the 
review, evaluation, ranking, and rating of research proposals for State-funded stem cell 
research; (3) establish procedures and guidelines to be used by the committee for the 
review, evaluation, ranking, and rating of research proposals for State-funded stem cell 
research; and (4) establish criteria, standards, and requirements for consideration of grant 
and loan applications based on the rankings and ratings of the committee. 
 
Administered by TEDCO, the Maryland Stem Cell Research Fund promotes stem cell 
research and cures through grants and loans to public and private entities in the State. 
Money in the fund may only be used to (1) award grants and loans for State-funded stem 
cell research, in accordance with recommendations from the commission; (2) award grants 
and loans for facilities, capital leases, and capital equipment where State-funded stem cell 
research is conducted, in accordance with the recommendations of the commission; and 
(3) pay the costs necessary to administer the fund. The fiscal 2026 budget includes 
$15.5 million in general funds for the fund.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to implement a viable grant and loan program. As the bill allows 
this funding to cover costs of administering the “fund,” this analysis assumes that 
authorization encompasses other aspects of “program” administration. TEDCO advises it 
requires a program manager, a program coordinator, and, after the first round of awards, 
an award manager to administer the program. Combined, the initial annual salaries for these 
staff total approximately $330,000; thus, after additional costs for the program, including 
fringe benefits, stipends for committee review, and standard overhead costs for TEDCO, 
the program could issue approximately 25 awards per year with an average funding amount 
of about $350,000. (If fewer awards are made, average award amounts increase.) TEDCO 
employees are not State employees.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 27/ Page 5 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly, 
assuming that the full amount available is used to cover administrative costs with the 
balance distributed as grants or loans each year. Special fund revenues further increase to 
the extent any such loans are repaid, allowing for additional grants or loans to be awarded. 
However, a reliable estimate of any loan repayments, and the corresponding increase in 
special fund revenues and expenditures, is not feasible. 
 
Program funds may be awarded to public or private entities in the State, which includes 
institutions of higher education. To the extent public four-year institutions of higher 
education receive and spend grants or loans through the program, higher education 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in biomedical research and biomedical 
supplies may benefit to the extent they are awarded grants or loans through the program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 392 (Senator King) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5