START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 58 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 58 
(Delegate Healey) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Transportation - Paratransit Services - Interjurisdictional Routes 
 
   
This bill makes various changes to the program through which the Maryland Department 
of Transportation (MDOT) provides funding to counties (including Baltimore City) for 
elderly and handicapped transportation services. Generally, the program is modified to 
require local transportation programs that receive State funding to include 
interjurisdictional paratransit service routes between counties and the facilities within those 
counties in the following networks of providers:  (1) Adventist Healthcare;  
(2) Johns Hopkins Medicine; (3) LifeBridge Health; (4) Luminis Health Maryland;  
(5) MedStar Health; and (6) University of Maryland Medical System.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  Local governments that receive State funding may incur additional costs to 
provide interjurisdictional paratransit services, as discussed below. While total State 
funding provided to the counties and Baltimore City is unchanged, the bill may affect the 
distribution of funding across local jurisdictions, as discussed below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 58/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Statewide Special Transportation Assistance Program 
 
Under current law, the Secretary of Transportation must identify separately within its 
annual budget an amount of funding to be used for elderly and handicapped transportation 
service in each county (including Baltimore City); MDOT advises that the program is 
referred to as the Statewide Special Transportation Assistance Program (SSTAP). The 
amount identified by the Secretary, or appropriated by the General Assembly, must be 
distributed using a specified formula based on the combined elderly and handicapped 
population in each county and Baltimore City. Chapter 416 of 2022 requires the Secretary 
to identify separately within MDOT’s annual budget at least the following amounts for the 
program:  
 
 
for fiscal 2024, at least $4,305,908; and  
 
for fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount that is equal to at least the 
amount in the immediately preceding fiscal year adjusted for inflation, as specified.  
 
Applications for Funding 
 
Under current law, a written application to receive funding through SSTAP may not be 
accepted or considered by the Secretary unless the local area agency on aging certifies its 
approval of the project for the funding for which the application is made.  
 
Under the bill, the written application must also identify a county-administered paratransit 
service that provides transportation for elderly and handicapped residents within 
designated service areas, including interjurisdictional routes between counties and the 
facilities within those counties in the specified networks of providers.  
 
Procedures for Program Enforcement 
 
Under current law, the Secretary, in consultation with the Department of Aging and the 
Department of Disabilities, must monitor the use of SSTAP funds and develop procedures 
for the proper enforcement of the program. The procedures must ensure that: 
 
 
a county uses its funding only for the acquisition or replacement of equipment or 
for the operating costs of the county’s transportation service;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 58/ Page 3 
 
a county, in consultation with the local area agency on aging, determines the most 
effective means of serving the transportation needs of its elderly and handicapped 
residents; 
 
each county cooperates with the others to best serve the transportation needs of the 
State’s elderly and handicapped residents; and 
 
a county administering a service that receives program funding must (1) must 
provide trips for any purpose; (2) must serve the elderly and handicapped citizens 
within the service areas identified in its application; (3) may not restrict its 
transportation service to clients of social service agencies; (4) may establish 
reasonable fares; and (5) may permit persons other than the elderly and handicapped 
to use or benefit from its transportation service to the extent capacity is available.  
 
Under the bill, the requirement that the procedures must ensure that each county must 
cooperate with others to best serve the transportation needs of the State’s elderly and 
handicapped residents is modified to specify that the cooperation must include establishing 
interjurisdictional paratransit service routes between counties and the facilities within those 
counties in the specified networks of providers.  
 
Also under the bill, the requirement that the procedures must ensure that a county 
administering a transportation service that receives program funds must serve the elderly 
and handicapped citizens within the service areas identified in its application is modified 
to specify that this must include interjurisdictional paratransit service routes between 
counties and the facilities within those counties in the specified networks of providers.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  In order to be eligible for SSTAP funding under the bill, counties and 
Baltimore City must provide interjurisdictional paratransit services as required by the bill. 
As a result, local paratransit expenditures likely increase to provide additional services.  
 
While total State funding provided to all counties and Baltimore City through the program 
is unchanged, the bill may affect the distribution of funding across local governments. 
MDOT anticipates that some applicants that receive funding under current law may be 
unable to meet the additional eligibility requirements established by the bill, resulting in a 
decrease in funding for those jurisdictions and an increase in funding for other jurisdictions. 
County and Baltimore City revenues and expenditures are affected accordingly.  
 
In addition, the Maryland Association of Counties advises that the bill may create 
administrative challenges for locally operated paratransit programs. Specifically, because 
health care providers frequently move into or out of network from year to year, a provider’s 
network status is not always clear. As a result, in order to meet the bill’s interjurisdictional 
paratransit service requirements, affected counties and Baltimore City will need to keep 
track of this information.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 58/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department 
of Aging; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Baltimore City; Kent County; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4