START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 92 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 92 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Beverage Containers Connected With Plastic Rings - Restriction 
on Sale 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from selling, offering for sale, or distributing for sale beverage 
containers that are connected to other beverage containers with a plastic ring connector 
unless the connector is made of a “biodegradable material.” The Maryland Department of 
the Environment (MDE) must adopt regulations to administer and enforce the prohibition. 
The bill specifies that existing enforcement and penalty provisions under §§ 9-334 through 
9-344 of the Environment Article apply to violations of the prohibition and any related 
regulations or orders. Monetary penalties collected under the bill are paid into the Maryland 
Clean Water Fund.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $120,000 in FY 2027. Future years 
are annualized and reflect ongoing costs and inflation. Special fund revenues may increase 
beginning as early as FY 2027 due to the bill’s penalty provisions.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$120,000 
$136,900 
$146,500 
$153,200 
$159,900 
Net Effect 
($120,000) 
($136,900) 
($146,500) 
($153,200) 
($159,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 92/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Biodegradable material” means a material that is able to be broken down 
into natural, harmless substances by living microorganisms. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Standards for Plastic Products under Subtitle 21 of Title 9 of the Environment Article  
 
Current law does not specifically address plastic ring connectors for beverage containers. 
However, Chapter 374 of 2017 established a general prohibition on selling a plastic product 
that is labeled as biodegradable, degradable, decomposable, or any other term that implies 
that the product will break down, fragment, biodegrade, or decompose in a landfill or any 
other environment. In addition, unless a product meets specified standards, a person is 
prohibited from (1) selling a plastic product in the State that is labeled as compostable or 
home compostable or (2) selling a film plastic product labeled as “soil degradable AG 
mulch film” or “biodegradable mulch film.” Further, a person who sells or distributes a 
compostable plastic bag or a compostable food or beverage product that is intended for sale 
or distribution by a retailer in the State must ensure that the bag or product meets specified 
labeling requirements.  
 
A person who violates the standards for plastic products established under Chapter 374 is 
subject to a civil penalty of $500 for a first violation, a civil penalty of $1,000 for a  
second violation, and a civil penalty of $2,000 for a third and subsequent violation. Any 
penalties collected under these provisions are paid to the county, municipality, or other 
local government that brought the enforcement action. 
 
Producer Responsibility for Covered Materials  
 
Chapter 431 of 2025 expanded the State’s producer responsibility program and the 
responsibilities of the Producer Responsibility Advisory Council with the intent to provide 
a framework for (1) minimizing the environmental and human health impacts of packaging; 
(2) conserving resources by increasing the recycling rates and recycled content of covered 
products; (3) modernizing and improving waste and recycling systems in the State; and 
(4) making producers financially responsible for investing in needed infrastructure and 
reimbursing local governments and other service providers for costs associated with 
transporting, collecting, and processing covered materials.  
 
The State’s producer responsibility standards broadly establish a framework for MDE to 
approve a producer responsibility organization and for producers to submit producer 
responsibility plans to MDE for review and approval by July 1, 2028. These producer 
responsibility plans govern the sale, distribution, and importation of covered materials in 
the State.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 92/ Page 3 
Relevant Enforcement Provisions 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-340 of the Environment Article, which are 
established under provisions relating to Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article 
(Water Pollution Control), establish enforcement procedures that govern (1) the ability of 
MDE to issue complaints, conduct hearings, issue corrective orders, and obtain injunctive 
relief and (2) judicial review of final decisions.  
 
In addition to being subject to an injunctive order, § 9-342 of the Environment Article 
establishes a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a violation of applicable statute or any 
related rule, regulation, order, or permit. Each day is a separate violation. In addition, MDE 
may impose an administrative penalty of up to $10,000 for each violation, not exceeding 
$100,000 total. Each day is a separate violation. An administrative penalty must be 
assessed with consideration given to several specified factors. 
 
Under § 9-343 of the Environment Article, a person who violates any provision of or fails 
to perform any duty imposed by Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article, or who 
violates any provision or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under that subtitle, is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a 
first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for 
a subsequent offense. The person may also be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
In addition, a person is guilty of misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum 
fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person (1) knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, 
or other document filed or required to be maintained under the subtitle or (2) falsifies, 
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required 
to be maintained under the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or 
issued under the subtitle. 
 
Pursuant to § 9-344 of the Environment Article, the Attorney General is in charge of 
prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf of the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:    
 
Costs to Administer and Enforce the Bill 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $120,046 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring two‑part time 
(50%) employees (one assistant Attorney General and one natural resources planner) 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 92/ Page 4 
within MDE to adopt regulations and administer and enforce the bill’s prohibition. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions (full-time equivalent) 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$103,847 
Operating Expenses 
    16,199 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$120,046 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
MDE and the Office of the Attorney General advise that two full‑time employees 
(one natural resources planner and one assistant Attorney General) are needed within MDE 
to implement the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services disagrees that the 
new responsibilities resulting from the bill justify the need for two full‑time staff. 
 
Penalty Provisions  
 
Special fund revenues to the Maryland Clean Water Fund in MDE may increase, beginning 
as early as fiscal 2027, from any penalties collected for violations of the bill.  
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State incarceration expenditures. Similarly, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the Judiciary.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in packaging beverage containers for 
sale may incur additional costs to obtain and use compliant ring connectors. There may 
also be costs to upgrade packaging machinery or equipment. Any manufacturers of plastic 
ring connectors in the State that are not made of biodegradable materials may see a decrease 
in the demand for their products. On the other hand, manufacturers of biodegradable plastic 
ring connectors or ring connectors made of other compliant materials likely see an increase 
in the demand for their products. The extent to which any affected manufacturers are 
Maryland small businesses, however, is unknown. Any increased manufacturing or 
packaging costs are likely passed on to distributors, retailers, and consumers in the form of 
higher prices. 
 
Because the bill’s prohibition takes effect October 1, 2026, there is little time for affected 
businesses to phase out existing stock and to identify/incorporate the use of compliant ring 
connectors. Retailers may also have noncompliant stock they are unable to sell before the 
prohibition takes effect.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 92/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5