START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 43 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 43 
(Delegate Foley) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Procurement - Advertising - Local News Organizations (Local Newspapers for 
Maryland Communities Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires that 50% of a procurement unit’s total dollar value of procurement 
contracts for print or digital advertising be made directly to local news organizations, 
except for advertising outside of the State for the purpose of promoting tourism to the State 
or employee recruitment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill creates operational inefficiencies to the extent that State agencies 
are required to alter the placement of paid media advertisements. No direct effect on 
revenues, but general fund revenues may be affected to the extent restrictions on 
advertising reduce lottery sales, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Local news organization” means an entity that:  (1) engages professionals 
to create, edit, produce, and distribute original content concerning matters of public interest 
through reporting, conducting interviews, observing current events, or analyzing 
information; (2) has at least one full time employee who resides in Maryland or within 
50 miles of Maryland and is dedicated to providing coverage of events in Maryland; (3) for 
a print publication, has published at least one print publication per month over the previous 
12 months, holds a valid US Postal Service periodical permit, and has at least 25% of its 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 43/ Page 2 
content dedicated to local news; (4) for an entity that publishes content only in digital form, 
has published at least one piece about events in Maryland per week over the previous 
12 months and for which the entity averaged at least 33% of its audience in the previous 
12 months as people located in Maryland; (5) has disclosed its beneficial owners or its 
board of directors; and (6) in the case of an entity that maintains tax status under § 501(c)(3) 
of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, has declared coverage of local or state news as its 
stated mission in a filing with the Internal Revenue Service. 
 
Current Law:  Advertising media includes newspapers, magazines, radio, television, 
direct mail, trade papers, billboards, window displays, conventions, exhibits, free samples, 
and similar promotional methods. State regulations allow advertising only for 
(1) recruitment of personnel; (2) procurement of scarce items; (3) disposal of scrap or 
surplus materials; (4) listing of a business’s name and location in a classified directory; 
(5) notices or advertisements required by law or regulations; and (6) the delivery of public 
service. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill may limit the ability of State agencies to reach a broad 
audience. Local news organizations typically serve smaller, more targeted audiences 
compared to statewide or national media outlets. Accordingly, State agencies aiming to 
maximize their reach or advertise across the entire State may find it more effective to use 
broader media platforms, including national social media outlets. Mandating greater 
reliance on smaller local news organizations could create operational inefficiencies, 
particularly for agencies to review news organizations’ coverage, employee residency, and 
readership/subscription data to verify that they satisfy the bill’s extensive requirements. 
 
The Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency advises that the bill requires 
shifting advertising funds away from broader, more widely viewed platforms on which it 
currently relies for advertising. This shift could reduce the overall effectiveness of its 
advertising campaigns, potentially leading to lower lottery sales and a corresponding 
decline in general fund revenues. However, the extent of consumer response and the precise 
impact on general fund revenues cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill benefits local news new organizations, many of which 
qualify as small businesses, by providing greater opportunities to sell advertisements in 
their published media. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1119 of 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 43/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 459 (Senator Rosapepe) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural 
Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Service and 
Civic Innovation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland State Lottery and 
Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3