START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 119 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 119 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Energy Performance Contracts - Navigators, Funding, and Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Clean Energy Center (MCEC) to hire or contract with a 
team of “navigators” (defined below) to assist public bodies in creating energy 
performance contracts (EPCs). Each fiscal year, the Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of $1.5 million from the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund (SEIF) to MCEC for this purpose. Additionally, the bill renames the Jane 
E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program within the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) as the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Grant and Loan Program and authorizes MEA 
to provide grants to public bodies under the program (under existing law, MEA may only 
make low- and zero-interest loans to specified entities). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund (SEIF) expenditures increase by $1.5 million annually, 
beginning in FY 2027. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. 
Though not reflected in the table below, special fund expenditures and revenues under the 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund are affected, as discussed further below, and State 
agencies may benefit from net energy cost savings. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
NonBud Rev. 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
SF Expenditure 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
NonBud Exp. 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
Net Effect 
($1,500,000) 
($1,500,000) 
($1,500,000) 
($1,500,000) 
($1,500,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 119/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments may benefit from net energy cost savings resulting from 
assistance and grant funding under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Navigators for Energy Performance Contracts 
 
A “navigator” is an individual who assists public bodies in creating EPCs. A “public body” 
includes a (1) unit of State government; (2) county; (3) municipality; (4) public institution 
of higher education; (5) local board of education; and (6) State or local hospital. An EPC 
is defined as an agreement for the provision of energy services, including electricity, 
heating, ventilation, cooling, steam, or hot water, in which a person agrees to design, install, 
finance, maintain, or manage energy systems or equipment to improve the energy 
efficiency of a building or facility in exchange for a portion of the energy savings. 
 
The bill specifies that MCEC must hire or contract with navigators and assign at least 
one navigator to each of eight regions of the State: 
 
 
Allegany, Frederick, Garrett, and Washington counties; 
 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Harford, and Howard counties; 
 
Baltimore City; 
 
Baltimore County; 
 
Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s counties;  
 
Caroline, Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and 
Worcester counties; 
 
Montgomery County; and 
 
Prince George’s County. 
 
A public body must submit written notice to a navigator before entering into an EPC. Upon 
receiving this notice, the navigator must assist the public body with creating an EPC, 
including (1) applying for federal, State, or other grants or loans to create or execute EPCs; 
(2) reviewing and establishing energy efficiency measures to reduce the energy costs of a 
building; (3) reviewing and establishing clean energy projects to reduce the energy costs 
of a building; and (4) working with MEA to apply for grants or loans under the 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Grant and Loan Program. 
 
The bill expands the authorized uses of SEIF to include providing funding to MCEC to 
hire or contract with navigators. For each fiscal year, the Governor must include an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 119/ Page 3 
appropriation of $1.5 million from SEIF to MCEC in the annual budget bill for this 
purpose. 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Grant and Loan Program 
 
The bill renames the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program as the Jane E. Lawton 
Conservation Grant and Loan Program. It authorizes the program to make grants to public 
bodies in addition to low-interest and zero-interest loans to nonprofit organizations, local 
jurisdictions, State agencies, and eligible businesses (permissible under existing law). 
 
To receive a grant under the program, a grantee must comply with the same application 
requirements specified for a borrower under existing law. The bill further specifies that if 
a grantee or borrower is a State hospital, their application for a grant or loan must be signed 
by the chief executive officer or president of the hospital. 
 
Grants made to public bodies may be used for the same purposes as specified for loans 
under existing law. MEA may award grants in conjunction with, or in addition to, financial 
assistance provided through other State or federal programs. Additionally, a grant recipient 
may use the energy cost savings associated with the grant to apply for additional federal, 
State, or private programs that are designed to increase the energy efficiency of a building 
or add renewable energy to a building. MEA must coordinate with MCEC to implement 
these provisions, as well as work with navigators in accordance with the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
The bill also exempts any State agency or public body (rather than only a State agency) 
that receives a loan under the program from a documentation requirement (documentation 
of anticipated energy cost savings over a defined period being greater than the total cost of 
the project) and certain loan terms. 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund 
 
In addition to its existing uses, the bill specifies that the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund 
may be used to provide grants to public bodies that apply under the Jane E. Lawton 
Conservation Grant and Loan Program. Each year, a portion of the money from the fund 
must be reserved for at least 90 days to provide loans to nonprofit organizations (as 
specified under existing law) and grants to public bodies. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Energy Performance Contracts 
 
Units of State government are authorized to enter into EPCs with a maximum duration of 
30 years, subject to the approval and control of the Board of Public Works (BPW) and the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 119/ Page 4 
Chief Procurement Officer within the Department of General Services (DGS). Prior to 
issuing a request for proposals (RFP) for an EPC, a unit must consult with DGS and the 
Chief Procurement Officer; DGS must review the RFP to ensure that it meets State energy 
standards and satisfies other specified conditions. The Treasurer is authorized to enter into 
a capital lease consistent with current law to finance an EPC. Before approving an EPC, 
BPW must ensure that projected annual energy savings under the contract will exceed the 
projected annual capital lease payments or payments to the contractor under the contract. 
It must also determine, based on a review by DGS, whether the proposed energy 
technology is appropriate for the time period covered by the contract. 
 
Energy Consumption in State-owned Buildings 
 
Chapter 423 of 2024 codified and implemented the requirements of the Governor’s 
Executive Order 01.01.2023.07, which requires that the State reduce energy consumption 
in State-owned buildings by 20% by 2031 compared with a fiscal 2018 baseline. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
MEA administers SEIF, which, among other revenue sources, receives funds from the sale 
of carbon dioxide emissions allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and 
alternative compliance payment revenues through the State’s renewable energy portfolio 
standard. Additionally, SEIF will receive a portion of corporate income tax revenues from 
qualified data centers that are operational on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
MEA is required to use SEIF for specified uses, including investing in the promotion, 
development, and implementation of (1) cost-effective energy efficiency and conservation 
programs, projects, or activities; (2) renewable and clean energy resources; (3) climate 
change programs directly related to reducing or mitigating the effects of climate change; 
and (4) demand response programs that are designed to promote changes in electric usage 
by customers. SEIF must also be used to provide targeted programs, projects, activities, 
and investments to reduce electricity consumption by customers in low-income and 
moderate-income residential sectors, and to provide supplemental funds for low-income 
energy assistance administered by the Department of Human Services. 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program 
 
The stated purpose of the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program is to provide 
financial assistance in the form of low-interest and zero-interest loans to nonprofit 
organizations, local jurisdictions, State agencies, and eligible businesses for projects to  
(1) promote energy conservation; (2) reduce consumption of fossil fuels; (3) improve 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 119/ Page 5 
energy efficiency; (4) enhance energy-related economic development and stability in the 
nonprofit, commercial, and industrial sectors; and (5) reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
To receive a loan under the program, a prospective borrower must file an application with 
MEA containing specified information. Loan proceeds disbursed to a borrower under the 
program may be used for the costs of (1) implementing projects (including the costs of all 
necessary technical assessments, studies, surveys, plans and specifications, and start-up, 
architectural, engineering or other special services); (2) procuring necessary technology, 
equipment, licenses, or materials; and (3) construction, rehabilitation, or modification 
(including the purchase and installation of any necessary machinery, equipment, or 
furnishings). 
 
A borrower other than a State agency must document that the anticipated energy cost 
savings over a defined period (according to a methodology acceptable to MEA) are greater 
than the total cost of the project to the borrower. Loans made to a borrower other than a 
State agency must (1) be repayable by the borrower from specified revenues; (2) bear 
interest at a rate that MEA determines to be necessary and reasonable for the project; and 
(3) be repayable in accordance with a schedule set by MEA. Additionally, a borrower other 
than a State agency must provide specified assurances for the repayment of a loan. 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund 
 
The Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program is funded through the Jane E. Lawton 
Conservation Fund, which may be used to (1) pay the expenses of the program; (2) provide 
loans to eligible borrowers and projects; and (3) enhance the credit of a financing offered 
by eligible banks and other financial institutions for projects. Each year, a portion of the 
money from the fund that is available for financial assistance under the program must be 
reserved for at least 90 days to provide loans to nonprofit organizations. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
Special fund expenditures increase by $1.5 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2027, due 
to the bill’s requirement that the Governor include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $1.5 million from SEIF to MCEC. The fiscal 2027 appropriation is 
discretionary since a funding mandate must be enacted prior to July 1 of the year before 
the fiscal year to which the mandate applies (in this case, prior to July 1, 2025, in order for 
the funding mandate to apply to fiscal 2027), but this analysis assumes that MCEC is 
provided funding from SEIF in fiscal 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 119/ Page 6 
While this bill does not expressly reallocate other, existing SEIF revenues/spending to 
satisfy the annual funding requirement for MCEC, the net impact on annual SEIF 
expenditures may be less than $1.5 million if MEA correspondingly reduces other SEIF 
spending to implement the bill. 
 
Maryland Clean Energy Center 
 
Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for MCEC (a nonbudgeted entity) increase by 
$1.5 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2027, reflecting the annual appropriations from 
SEIF and MCEC’s use of the funding to hire or contract with navigators to assist public 
bodies in creating EPCs. This analysis assumes that MCEC spends the full $1.5 million 
from SEIF in each fiscal year. 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Grant and Loan Program 
 
Special fund expenditures from the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund, and revenues to 
the fund from loan repayments, are expected to be affected, whether in fiscal 2027 or in 
future fiscal years, by the bill’s authorization for grants to public bodies to be made from 
the fund (and the requirement that a portion of the annual funding be reserved for those 
grants) in addition to loans. The extent of the impact on expenditures from, and revenues 
to, the fund is dependent in part on MEA’s allocation of funding between grants and  
loans – funding allocated toward grants does not get repaid to the fund, reducing  
(1) ongoing revenues for the program from loan repayments and (2) eventually fund 
expenditures if the fund is not otherwise replenished with other State funding. The extent 
and timing of the bill’s impact on special fund expenditures from, and revenues to, the fund 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
For context, at the end of fiscal 2025, the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund had a closing 
balance of $13.0 million and the fund’s fiscal 2025 revenues and expenditures were 
$969,500 and $1.7 million, respectively. The fiscal 2026 budget, and the fiscal 2027 budget 
as introduced, authorize $5.0 million of expenditures under the program in each fiscal year. 
MEA advises that there is currently an outstanding balance of $6.3 million of loans made 
from the program that will be repaid over time. 
 
State Agencies as Public Bodies Receiving Grants and Assistance 
 
State agencies, as public bodies under the bill, may benefit from (1) assistance, from 
navigators hired under the bill, in creating EPCs, and the future net energy cost savings 
from those contracts over time, and (2) the availability of grants (as opposed to loans) from 
the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program for energy conservation projects, allowing 
agencies to retain more of the energy cost savings (rather than use the savings to repay a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 119/ Page 7 
loan) and, as suggested under the bill, potentially use the savings for additional energy 
conservation efforts. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Similar to State agencies, local governments, as public bodies under 
the bill, may benefit from (1) assistance, from navigators hired under the bill, in creating 
EPCs, and the future net energy cost savings from those contracts over time, and (2) the 
availability of grants (as opposed to loans) from the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan 
Program for energy conservation projects, allowing local governments to retain more of 
the energy cost savings (rather than use the savings to repay a loan) and, as suggested under 
the bill, potentially use the savings for additional energy conservation efforts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide goods or services for energy 
conservation projects may meaningfully benefit to the extent the bill increases projects 
undertaken by public bodies under the bill, with the assistance of navigators and/or grant 
funding from the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Grant and Loan Program. Small businesses 
that might benefit in the future from loans under the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan 
Program in the absence of the bill may have less access to such financing under the bill as 
a portion of the funding is used for grants (for which small businesses are not eligible), 
reducing loan repayment revenues to support the program over time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Wicomico counties; City of 
Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of General Services; Board of Public 
Works; Maryland Energy Administration; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick 
County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7