START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 166 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 166 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Health – Henrietta Lacks Commission – Establishment (Henrietta Lacks 
Commission of Maryland Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Henrietta Lacks Commission. The State agencies represented on 
the commission must jointly staff the commission. Members of the commission may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State 
travel regulations. Annually beginning December 1, 2027, the commission must report on 
its activities to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
by $81,500 in FY 2027 for staff, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and 
ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. This estimate does not reflect the potential cost 
of other actions that may be taken by the commission under the bill. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
81,500 
95,400 
99,900 
104,400 
109,000 
Net Effect 
($81,500) 
($95,400) 
($99,900) 
($104,400) 
($109,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County may benefit, particularly Turner Station and the 
surrounding areas, to the extent the commission promotes economic development as 
specified under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 166/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission consists of:  (1) one member of the Senate; 
(2) one member of the House of Delegates; (3) the Secretaries of Health and Commerce 
(or their designees); (4) the State Superintendent of Education (or their designee); (5) the 
chair of the State Anatomy Board (or their designee); and (6) representatives of the 
following entities, appointed by the Governor:  the State Ethics Commission (SEC), the 
Life Sciences Advisory Board, the Maryland Economic Development Commission 
(MEDCO), the Maryland Board of Tourism, and the Maryland State Archives. The 
Governor must designate the chair of the commission. The term of a member is two years. 
 
The commission must: 
 
 
in consultation with the O’Neill Institute of National and Global Health Law, 
conduct bioethical oversight of life sciences activities in the State that involve 
human research and body, organ, and tissue donation for medical training; 
 
promote education of the life of Henrietta Lacks and HeLa science as developed by 
the National Institutes of Health; 
 
curate a registry of significant tributes to Henrietta Lacks; 
 
work with appropriate State agencies to include tributes to Henrietta Lacks in 
State tourism campaigns; 
 
promote economic development of the Turner Station of Dundalk; and 
 
make recommendations on implementing the goals of the commission. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 552 of 2002 prohibits a person from conducting research using a 
human subject unless the research complies with federal regulations on the protection of 
human subjects (Common Rule, 45 CFR 46). Despite any provision in federal regulations 
limiting protection to human subjects in certain research, the protections apply to all 
research using a human subject in the State. 
 
Multiple federal and State regulatory bodies have authority to oversee (or make 
recommendations and provide guidance on) life science activities, including: 
 
 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), under the 
Common Rule (45 CFR 46) which requires that federally funded research involving 
human subjects undergo ethical review (as noted above, Maryland law requires 
adherence to these regulations); 
 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), under 21 CFR 50 and 56, which 
regulate the protection of human subjects, informed consent, and Institutional 
Review Boards (IRBs) for FDA-regulated trials; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 166/ Page 3 
 
the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research, under the National Research Act of 1974, which provides 
principles that guided the establishment of the Common Rule and required the 
U.S. Public Health Service to establish regulations protecting human subjects, 
leading to the formal requirement of establishing IRBs; 
 
HHS’ Office of Civil Rights, under the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act, which protects the privacy of medical records, including human 
subjects research; 
 
IRBs (independent committees established by organizations carrying out human 
subjects research to review and monitor such research), which exist in Maryland at 
federal agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health, FDA, and the 
National Cancer Institute; MDH; public and private universities; community 
hospitals and health care systems; and private commercial companies; and 
 
the State Anatomy Board, which has the right to control and distribute human bodies 
donated for medical science. 
 
State Expenditures:  Representatives from Commerce, the Maryland State Department of 
Education, SEC, MEDCO, and the Maryland State Archives can serve on the commission 
and likely provide supplemental staff support with existing budgeted resources. 
 
While the bill requires all of the State agencies represented on the commission to jointly 
provide staff to the commission, MDH advises that it would likely take the lead. Therefore, 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $81,513 in fiscal 2027, which accounts  
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one health policy analyst to staff the commission. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$72,372 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$81,513 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not reflect the cost of promoting education of the life of Henrietta Lacks 
and HeLa science, curating a registry of significant tributes or including such tributes in 
State tourism campaigns, or promoting economic development of the Turner Station 
Community as such costs cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 166/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  Henrietta Lacks was an African American woman whose cancer 
cells are the source of the HeLa cell line, the first immortalized human cell line and one of 
the most important cell lines in medical research. Henrietta received treatment at 
Johns Hopkins Hospital in 1951. At that time, neither federal law nor hospital policy 
required that patients be informed or asked for permission before their tissues were used in 
research. 
 
Turner Station, home to Henrietta Lacks, was founded in the late 19th century because of 
a need for African American mill workers to have a place to live while the country 
remained segregated. 
 
The O’Neill Institute of National and Global Health Law is a research institute at 
Georgetown University Law Center. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  MEDCO; Department of Commerce; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Archives; State Ethics 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4