START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 107 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 107 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Intelligent Speed Assistance System Pilot Program - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Intelligent Speed Assistance (ISA) System Pilot Program, which 
must be administered by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA). The bill requires an 
individual to participate in the program if the individual has accumulated points in an 
amount that would result in suspension or revocation of a driver’s license under specified 
provisions of State law. Generally, an individual must be a participant for one year. The 
bill establishes numerous rules and procedures for program participation and requires 
MVA to adopt regulations to carry out the bill – including requirements for a participant to 
operate a motor vehicle equipped with an ISA system in a safe manner (as determined by 
MVA). By December 30, 2029, MVA must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the implementation of the pilot program. The bill terminates 
June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues likely increase negligibly from 
FY 2027 through 2030 due to program participation fees, as discussed below. No effect in 
FY 2031 due to termination of the pilot program. MVA can likely implement the pilot 
program with existing resources, as discussed below, although a consultant may be needed 
to develop the program. District Court operations are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 107/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An “approved service provider” means a person who is certified by MVA 
and a manufacturer to service, install, monitor, calibrate, and provide information on ISA 
systems. A “manufacturer” means a person that manufactures ISA systems. 
 
MVA must establish a protocol for the program through the adoption of regulations that 
require certain minimum standards for all service providers who service, install, monitor, 
calibrate, and provide information on ISA systems. The regulations must require that: 
 
 
a service provider who applies to MVA for certification as an approved service 
provider demonstrate the ability to competently service, install, monitor, calibrate, 
and provide information to MVA at least every 30 days on individuals required to 
use ISA systems; 
 
a service provider who applies to MVA for certification as an approved service 
provider be certified by a signed affidavit from the manufacturer that the service 
provider has been trained by an authorized manufacturer and that the service 
provider is competent to service, install, monitor, calibrate, and provide information 
on ISA systems; 
 
approved service providers be considered to be authorized representatives of the 
manufacturer; and 
 
any service of notice on an approved service provider be considered to be service of 
notice on the manufacturer who certified the approved service provider. 
 
An individual must be an ISA system program participant if the individual has accumulated 
points in an amount that would result in suspension or revocation of a driver’s license under 
specified provisions of State law due to any combination of the applicable violations. The 
relevant violations (and the related points assessed upon conviction) are shown in 
Exhibit 1. MVA may issue a restrictive license for the period of the suspension to an 
individual who participates in the ISA system program. 
 
An individual who participates in the program must be a participant for one year. However, 
if an individual fails to participate in the program or successfully complete it, MVA must 
suspend the individual’s driver’s license until the individual successfully completes the 
program – regardless of other provisions of State law requiring reinstatement. 
 
More specifically, MVA must (1) modify a suspension and issue a restrictive driver’s 
license requiring the use of an ISA system for the duration of the program participation to 
a participant who is otherwise eligible for the license and (2) reinstate the driver’s license, 
subject to a restriction requiring the use of an ISA system for the duration of program 
participation, of a participant whose driver’s license has been revoked. A notice of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 107/ Page 3 
suspension or revocation (for the applicable offenses noted in Exhibit 1) sent to an 
individual must include information about the program and how individuals may 
participate. MVA must establish a fee for participation in the program that is sufficient to 
cover program costs. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Violations Requiring ISA System Pilot Program Participation if Total Points Accumulated 
(Alone or in Combination) Result in Suspension or Revocation of a Driver’s License 
 
Violation 
Points Assessed 
Upon Conviction 
Speeding in excess of the posted speed limit by 10 MPH or more 
2 points 
Displaying or possessing a cancelled, revoked or suspended license 
3 points 
Speeding in excess of a posted speed limit of 65 MPH by 20 MPH 
or more 
5 points 
Reckless driving 
6 points 
Driving vehicles not authorized under license or unauthorized 
driving of a school vehicle 
8 points 
Driving while texting or using a handheld telephone – death or 
serious bodily injury 
12 points 
 
ISA:  Intelligent Speed Assistance 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The bill further establishes the following processes, procedures, and requirements related 
to the use and operation of ISA systems: 
 
 
A participant may not operate a motor vehicle in violation of program requirements. 
 
A participant is considered to have begun participation in the program on the day 
the ISA system is installed in the participant’s motor vehicle. 
 
An individual required to use an ISA system (1) must be monitored by MVA and 
(2) must pay the required fee (but MVA must waive the fee for an individual who 
is indigent). 
 
If an individual completes the program and the individual’s license is not refused, 
revoked, suspended, or canceled under another provision of the Transportation 
Article, MVA must immediately issue a license to the individual. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 107/ Page 4 
 
If MVA removes an individual from the ISA system program because the individual 
violated any program requirement, MVA may allow the individual to reenter the 
program after 30 days from the date of removal. If an individual reenters the 
program in this manner, the individual must participate for three months in addition 
to the period of time that was necessary for successful completion of the ISA system 
program at the time of removal. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Effect of Accumulated Points (§ 16-404 of the Transportation Article) 
 
MVA maintains a point system designed to track the frequency and severity of moving 
violations and other vehicle-related convictions. Under this system, MVA is required to 
send a warning letter to an individual who accumulates three points. Upon accumulation 
of 5 points, an individual is required to attend a driver improvement program. MVA is 
required to suspend the license of an individual who has accumulated 8 points and to revoke 
the license of an individual who has accumulated 12 points. 
 
License Reinstatement (§ 16-208 of the Transportation Article) 
 
An individual whose license or privilege to drive has been revoked may apply for 
reinstatement according to the following schedule: 
 
 
any time after a first revocation; 
 
one year following a second revocation; 
 
18 months following a third revocation; and 
 
two years following a fourth or subsequent revocation. 
 
However, for revocations related to specified drunk or drugged driving offenses resulting 
in the death or life-threatening injury of another person and failure to remain at the scene 
of an accident resulting in death or serious bodily injury, the individual must wait until 
five years after the revoked license is surrendered to and received by MVA to file a 
reinstatement application. However, if MVA finds that the five-year waiting period would 
cause undue hardship or extenuating circumstances exist, the individual may file a 
reinstatement application after two years. 
 
In general, MVA is authorized to reinstate an individual’s license upon submission of a 
timely reinstatement application or, in the case of a first revocation, six months after the 
application. However, if an individual’s license or privilege has been refused, revoked, 
suspended, or canceled under any other provision of the Maryland Vehicle Law, the license 
or privilege may not be reinstated. Under certain circumstances, MVA may only reinstate 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 107/ Page 5 
a license if, after conducting an investigation of an individual’s habits, MVA is satisfied 
that it would be safe to do so. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  TTF revenues increase negligibly in fiscal 2027 and by as much as 
$61,020 from fiscal 2028 through 2030 due to the assessment of fees associated with 
participation in the ISA system program, as illustrated in Exhibit 2. Although the bill takes 
effect October 1, 2026, MVA anticipates an eight-month start-up delay; as a result, 
fiscal 2027 revenues reflect only one month of revenues. MVA anticipates approximately 
678 individuals may be subject to the bill’s requirements each year. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Illustrative Annual Transportation Trust Fund Revenues Attributable to the 
Intelligent Speed Assistance System Pilot Program for Each Annual Cohort* 
 
Fee 
Annual 
Participants 
Fee 
TTF 
Revenues 
Restricted License (Upon Program Entrance) 
678 
$20  
$13,560  
Program Participation 
50  
33,900  
Corrected License (Upon Program Completion) 
20  
13,560  
Total TTF Revenues 
  
  
$61,020  
 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
*Although the bill takes effect October 1, 2026, the Motor Vehicle Administration estimates approximately 
eight months to fully implement the program. Therefore, the effect on TTF revenues in fiscal 2027 is 
negligible. The above estimate reflects anticipated annualized revenues from fiscal 2028 through 2030. As 
the program terminates June 30, 2030, there is no effect on TTF finances after fiscal 2030. 
 
Source:  Motor Vehicle Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
This illustrative estimate assumes that each program participant is responsible for the 
following costs at each step in the process:  (1) obtaining an updated driver’s license with 
the applicable restriction ($20); (2) a program participation fee ($50); and (3) a fee to 
receive a corrected driver’s license with the restriction removed upon program completion 
($20). Although participants are also responsible for covering the costs associated with 
device installation and management, those costs are assumed to be paid directly to 
approved service providers and, thus, have no effect on TTF revenues. 
 
This illustrative estimate also assumes that individuals participating due to revocation must 
still pay the fee for reinstatement ($90). However, it is unclear whether individuals 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 107/ Page 6 
participating due to suspension must do so; to the extent they are not subject to a 
reinstatement fee, the revenues associated with their program participation total to the same 
amount they would have otherwise paid for reinstatement. The illustrative example above 
does not reflect any such offsets. 
 
The number of individuals who may qualify for a fee exemption (due to the bill’s provision 
exempting certain indigent individuals) is unknown and not reflected in this illustrative 
estimate. Additionally, the illustrative estimate generally assumes that revenues associated 
with program participation and completion are realized in the same fiscal year; in reality, 
revenues may not be realized until the subsequent fiscal year (assuming no extension), 
resulting in a more uneven distribution of fee revenues across fiscal years. 
 
MVA advises the pilot program can likely be implemented with existing resources under 
the assumed caseloads noted above. However, an increase in caseloads may significantly 
impact MVA operations and necessitate hiring additional staff, particularly given that use 
of ISA systems in the United States is a relatively recent development. MVA notes that 
one additional staff is likely needed per every 1,500 program participants. Furthermore, 
although the bill may require significant internal reprogramming, website changes, and 
other communication changes, these changes can also likely be handled with existing 
resources. 
 
Additionally, this estimate does not include costs for an outside consultant to assist MVA 
in developing the program. According to MVA, due to a lack of federal standards for ISA 
restriction devices in vehicles and current staff expertise in this area, the administration 
may need to employ an outside consultant to develop the program parameters with a 
particular focus on standardizing device and vendor requirements. Costs for these services 
are approximately $100,000 per year. At this time, it is unclear how long MVA would need 
these services for program development. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Approved service providers that are small businesses may realize 
revenue increases due to increased demand for ISA systems under the bill. MVA advises 
that some vendors in the State currently approved to work with Ignition Interlock Program 
participants are actively piloting speed enforcement systems technologies in other states. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), ISA systems can vary from minimal systems that provide only 
information to active speed limit control that could be mandatory or voluntary (with on/off 
activation switches). For example, ISA systems may provide information only (i.e., display 
the speed limit and changes) or could automatically prevent speeding above the speed limit 
(i.e., mandatory speed compliance). Compared to speed governors (which can only limit 
the maximum speed of a vehicle), ISA systems have the potential to help control speed of 
all motor vehicle types according to the prevailing limit at a given location. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 107/ Page 7 
NHTSA notes that ISA systems have been found to lower speeding among drivers using 
the systems. Varied types of systems have been widely studied in European countries for 
acceptability and effects on driver behavior. In Europe, the effects on speeding have been 
dramatic for both warning and control type ISA systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 993 and HB 1139 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 366 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  U.S. Department of Transportation (National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7