START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 110 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 110 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - School Buses - Seat Belts 
 
 
This bill requires every school bus purchased on or after July 1, 2030, and registered in the 
State to be equipped with, for each seat on the school bus, three-point seat belts that are 
accessible to passengers. Local school systems must provide student instruction on school 
bus safety and the proper use of seat belts on school buses, as part of an existing program 
of safety education. The failure of a school bus operator to ensure that an occupant of a 
school bus was wearing a seat belt may not be the basis of a criminal prosecution or a civil 
action for damages against the school bus operator or a school, school district, or 
municipality. As under current law, “seat belt” is defined as any belt, strap, harness, or like 
device. The bill also makes various technical changes to terminology.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase statewide by approximately 
$4.3 million annually over a 12-year period beginning in FY 2031, assuming that additional 
costs associated with required seat belts are covered through the regular cycle of scheduled 
annual school bus replacements. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The driver of a school bus is responsible for operation of the school bus 
and may not drive it into a roadway without first stopping and determining that there is no 
danger from any other vehicle. The person responsible for any pupils on a school bus is the 
teacher on the bus or, if a teacher is not present, the driver. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 110/ Page 2 
A person responsible for pupils on a school bus may not permit (1) the number of standing 
pupils to exceed one pupil for each part of the aisle that is bounded by forward facing seats 
or (2) any pupil to stand if the school bus is equipped with any lengthwise seats. A person 
responsible for pupils on a school bus may not require any pupil to sit on the floor and may 
not permit any pupil to operate the front door opening mechanism, except in an emergency, 
or to stand in front of the stanchion and guardrail. 
 
Each public school must have a program of safety education that is organized and 
administered under bylaws, rules, and regulations of the State Board of Education. 
 
Every motor vehicle registered in Maryland and assembled after June 1, 1964, must be 
equipped with two sets of seat belts in the front seat of the vehicle and, if assembled after  
June 1, 1969, must have two sets of seat belts on the rear seat of the vehicle. However, for 
purposes of this requirement, “motor vehicle” does not include any bus, motorcycle (other 
than an autocycle), or truck.  
 
Generally, a person may not operate a motor vehicle unless the person and each occupant 
under 16 years old are restrained by a seatbelt or a child safety seat, and a person who is at 
least 16 years old is responsible for being restrained by a seatbelt while being a passenger 
in a motor vehicle. For persons over 16 years old, a rear seat belt violation is a 
secondary offense. A person convicted of a violation of this requirement is subject to a fine 
of up to $50. However, for purposes of this requirement, a school bus is among classes of 
vehicles that are exempted.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) advises that 
it is typical for local school systems to purchase new or replacement school buses in the 
summer (i.e., between school years). Therefore, local expenditures increase beginning in 
summer 2030 (fiscal 2031) and continue over a 12-year period (through fiscal 2042), at 
which time all school buses in the State are assumed to be equipped with three-point seat 
belts. 
 
According to MSDE, new school buses that have seat belts installed for every passenger 
are approximately $10,000 more expensive than those without them. Given the 
12 to 15 year replacement cycles for school buses in each of the 24 local school systems, 
this estimate assumes that local school systems meet the bill’s requirements over 
approximately 12 years. As the number of school buses in the State have remained 
relatively constant over the past decade, this analysis assumes a stable number of school 
buses throughout the State over the 12-year forecast period. For school systems that 
contract for the provision of some school bus services, this analysis assumes that the cost 
of upgrading new buses purchased by contractors will be passed on to local school systems 
via increased rates. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 110/ Page 3 
In total, local school system expenditures are anticipated to increase by $4.3 million 
annually from fiscal 2031 through 2042. The cost will be covered by each local school 
system according to their share of the 5,144 school buses assumed to be affected by the 
bill. Therefore, cost increases range considerably across local school systems. For example,  
Prince George’s County may realize approximately $875,800 in additional expenditures 
annually through fiscal 2042, while Kent County may realize approximately 
$19,200 additional expenditures annually over the assumed time period. This estimate does 
not account for any ancillary replacement or repair costs associated with the installation of 
seat belts on new school buses. This estimate also does not account for any inflationary 
pressures in the price of seatbelt installation through fiscal 2042 and assumes a constant 
additional $10,000 cost to add seat belts to new school buses across the 12-year forecast 
period. Actual costs to local school systems may be higher to the extent school systems 
incur additional ancillary costs and to the extent the additional cost to purchase new school 
buses with seat belts increases through fiscal 2042. 
 
Three jurisdictions (Baltimore, Montgomery, and St. Mary’s counties) report that the local 
school system already purchases school buses with seat belts (and Montgomery County 
has done so since 2020); thus, the bill is assumed to have no additional impact on these 
three local school systems. To the extent additional counties are already purchasing school 
buses with seat belts, the fiscal impact of the bill will be less significant. However, the 
precise number of school buses in the State that are equipped with seat belts consistent with 
the bill’s requirement cannot be determined at this time. 
 
MSDE advises that all local school systems provide some level of school vehicle safety 
instruction to students. It is assumed that incorporating instruction on seat belt safety will 
not result in substantial local operational or fiscal effects. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 498 and HB 134 of 2025, and SB 724 and HB 196 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Association of Counties; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne 
Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Frederick County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 110/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4