START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 152 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 152 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Electronic Funds Transfers - Regulations (Elder Fraud 
Prevention Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill establishes that wire transfers involving electronic funds transfers (EFTs) made 
ancillary to bank-to-bank transfers via a wire service are subject to the provisions of the 
federal Electronic Funds Transfer Act (EFTA) of 1978. The bill applies to all financial 
institutions operating in the State, but if it is found to be inapplicable to federally charted 
financial institutions or financial institutions operating in the State that are chartered 
outside of the State, it abrogates and ceases to carry any force. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Generally 
 
EFTA is intended to protect individual consumers engaging in EFT and remittance 
transfers. Key provisions of EFTA include limiting consumer liability for unauthorized 
EFTs, as specified (§ 1693g), mandating error resolution procedures for certain financial 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 152/ Page 2 
institutions (§ 1693f), and establishing civil and criminal liability for financial institutions 
under certain circumstances (§ 1693m). 
 
Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Definition of “Electronic Transfer” 
 
Section 1693a of EFTA defines “electronic fund transfer” as any transfer of funds, other 
than specified commercial paper, which is initiated through specified electronic means “so 
as to order, instruct, or authorize a financial institution to debit or credit an account.” The 
term includes, among other things, point-of-service transfers, automated teller machine 
transactions, direct deposits or withdrawals of funds, and transfers initiated by telephone. 
 
Regulation of Financial Services, Generally 
 
The financial services industry in Maryland is regulated by the Office of Financial 
Regulation (OFR) within the Maryland Department of Labor and the Office of the Attorney 
Generals’ Securities Division. Under the direction and authority of the Commissioner of 
Financial Regulation, OFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed financial 
institutions operating in Maryland. These include depository institutions such as  
Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as 
well as nondepository entities such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer 
lenders, sales finance companies, installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan 
originators, credit services businesses, debt management services providers, debt 
settlement services providers, consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. 
 
State Regulation of Funds Transferred 
 
Title 4A of the Maryland Uniform Commercial Code governs funds transfers. Generally, 
Title 4A does not apply to a funds transfer any part of which is governed by EFTA. In the 
event of an inconsistency between an applicable provision of Title 4A and an applicable 
provision of EFTA, the provision of EFTA governs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 332 and SB 659 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 152/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3