START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 178 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 178 
(Delegate Patterson) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Sickle Cell Disease - Specialized Clinics and Scholarship Program 
for Medical Residents 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to establish three specialized 
clinics dedicated to the management and treatment of sickle cell disease (SCD) – one in 
Montgomery County, one in Harford County, and one on the Eastern Shore. For 
fiscal 2028, the Governor must include $6,138,000 in the annual budget bill to support 
clinic operations, staffing, training, and social support services. By December 1 each year, 
MDH must report on the specialized clinics to the General Assembly. MDH must establish 
a scholarship program for medical residents who choose to specialize in classical 
hematology with a focus on SCD care. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. MDH general fund expenditures increase by 
$6.1 million in FY 2028 due to the mandated appropriation; future years reflect ongoing 
staff to complete the annual report. Federal fund revenues and expenditures may increase 
by an indeterminate amount as early as FY 2027 for the scholarship program. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$6,138,000 
$64,000 
$67,000 
$70,000 
FF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
($6,138,000) 
($64,000) 
($67,000) 
($70,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for local health departments (LHDs) in the 
counties where the clinics are established may increase under the bill, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 178/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Specialized Sickle Cell Clinics 
 
Each clinic must:   
 
 
operate under a hub-and-spoke model with a specialized SCD care hub; 
 
provide routine care, pain management, genetic counseling, mental health services, 
surveillance, and patient education; and 
 
in collaboration with the specialized SCD care hub (1) ensure consistent access to 
hub-based SCD specialists through telehealth or on-site visits to manage complex 
patient needs; (2) offer comprehensive behavioral health and social support services 
to address the multifaceted challenges faced by individuals with SCD; (3) operate 
or coordinate infusion therapy and structured pain management programs tailored 
to the clinical demands of SCD patients; (4) collaborate with local primary care 
providers and social services agencies to streamline referrals, reduce care gaps, and 
address social determinants of health within the community; and (5) partner with an 
SCD‑focused community-based organization located in the State to identify and 
address social barriers, including assistance with transportation, housing, nutrition, 
and other essential supports. 
 
Mandated Appropriation 
 
A portion of the funding provided to support clinics must be allocated to community‑based 
organizations and SCD nonprofit organizations located in the State to enhance patient 
outreach, provide education, expand support services, strengthen community partnerships, 
and improve the overall continuum of care for individuals living with SCD with an 
emphasis on supporting the transition from pediatric to adult care. 
 
The funding must be prioritized for (1) the hiring of qualified health care professionals, 
including hematologists, nurse practitioners, nurse navigators, and community health care 
workers; (2) addressing social determinants of health affecting individuals with SCD; and 
(3) collaborating with community-based organizations and SCD nonprofit organizations 
located in the State. 
 
Required Report 
 
By December 1 each year, MDH must report to the General Assembly. The report must 
address, for each clinic, (1) clinic operations; (2) outcomes for patients treated at the clinic; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 178/ Page 3 
(3) the overall impact of each clinic in reducing health disparities in individuals with SCD; 
(4) utilization rates, patient volume, and accessibility, including impacts of hours of 
operations and geographic reach; and (5) implementation of telemedicine and digital health 
tools to expand and extend care to underserved areas. 
 
Scholarship Program 
 
The scholarship program must provide financial assistance to the medical resident in 
exchange for the recipient’s commitment to practice in the State for a minimum period of 
time, as determined by MDH, following the recipient’s residency or fellowship. To the 
extent practicable, MDH must use federal funding to support the scholarship program. 
 
Current Law:  SCD is a group of inherited red blood cell disorders in which the cells 
become hard and sticky and look like a C-shaped farm tool called a “sickle.” 
Approximately 4,000 individuals in Maryland have SCD. In Maryland, all newborn babies 
are screened for SCD as part of universal newborn screening. The screening includes 
sickle cell trait (SCT), sickle beta thalassemia, and SCD testing and identifies newborns 
that are “at risk” for potential disorders. Information is also provided on whether additional 
diagnostic testing is required. 
 
On determination of the presence of sickle cell anemia, MDH must (1) notify the physician 
of record or the institution where the child is born, and the parents or guardian of the infant;  
(2) provide the parents or guardian of the infant and the physician with educational 
materials; and (3) offer referral for genetic counseling. Within two months after a positive 
finding of sickle cell anemia, a confirmatory test must be administered, and the results must 
be reported to MDH. 
 
Chapter 279 of 2022 requires the Statewide Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease, in 
consultation with MDH, to establish and implement a system of providing information on 
SCT or the thalassemia trait to an individual who has either trait or, for a minor, the 
individual’s family. MDH must maintain a list of online resources for health care 
practitioners to improve their understanding and clinical treatment of individuals with 
SCD or SCT. Chapter 279 required the steering committee, in conjunction with MDH and 
other relevant stakeholders, to make recommendations on specified issues and submit a 
report to the General Assembly. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Specialized Sickle Cell Clinics 
 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $6,138,000 in fiscal 2028 to reflect the bill’s 
mandated appropriation. This analysis assumes that a portion of these funds are used by 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 178/ Page 4 
MDH to hire one full-time contractual nurse program consultant to oversee the 
implementation of the local clinics, provide technical assistance, and coordinate the 
centralized care hub. This estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, and operating 
expenses. The position is assumed to begin July 1, 2027, and terminate June 30, 2028 
(concurrent with the mandated appropriation). Remaining funds are used to establish the 
three clinics, as specified under the bill. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2029, once the clinics have been established and are fully operational, 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $64,013, which reflects the cost to hire 
one part-time epidemiologist to evaluate the clinics and submit the annual reports. This 
estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
-1.0 
Permanent Position 
- 
0.5 
Funding for Establishment of Clinics 
$6,017,227 
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
102,450 
$62,596 
Operating Expenses 
       18,323 
    1,417 
Total General Fund Expenditures 
$6,138,000 
$64,013 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The bill specifies that MDH must establish and report on the clinics but does not specify 
the source of ongoing funding for the three clinics following fiscal 2028; therefore, such 
costs are not reflected in this analysis. 
 
Scholarship Program 
 
The bill requires MDH to establish a scholarship program for medical residents who chose 
to specialize in benign or classical hematology with a focus on sickle cell care, and to the 
extent practicable, use federal funding to support the scholarship program. MDH can likely 
establish the scholarship program and seek federal funding using existing budgeted 
resources. To the extent that MDH obtains federal funding for the scholarship program, 
federal fund revenues and expenditures increase as early as fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 178/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires MDH to establish a specialized SCD clinic in 
Harford and Montgomery counties, and one county on the Eastern Shore. Funding for the 
initial establishment of the clinics is provided by MDH. Thus, revenues and expenditures 
for the LHDs in the counties in which the clinics are established may increase under the 
bill in fiscal 2028 to the extent that they are involved in the establishment of such clinics 
(potentially as a location for a clinic or as a partner in the process of establishing the clinic 
or the hub‑and‑spoke model). The amount of such increase cannot be reliably estimated 
and will depend on the LHDs’ involvement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1306 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Harford and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5