START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 123 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Ways and Means and Judiciary 
 
 
School Systems - Reportable Offenses - Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands the offenses that qualify as reportable offenses and makes changes to 
related reporting requirements. If the State’s Attorney determines that school officials have 
not been notified of a student’s arrest for a reportable offense (as required under current 
law), the State’s Attorney may notify the school officials. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can adjust its 
reporting of reportable offenses with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes to notification requirements and procedures are not 
anticipated to materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The definition of “school security officer” is altered to include a school 
principal, school administrator, law enforcement officer, or other individual employed by 
a “school system” or a local government who is designated by a county superintendent or 
a school principal to help maintain the security and safety of a school. A “school system” 
means (1) the schools and school programs under the supervision of a local superintendent 
and (2) the institution of higher education or higher education program in which a student 
is enrolled as part of a dual enrollment program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 123/ Page 2 
Reportable Offenses 
 
The following offenses are added to the list of reportable offenses in current law:   
 
 
sexual offense in the fourth degree; 
 
child pornography, if the victim does not have knowledge of or does not consent to 
the production or the distribution of the child pornography; 
 
visual surveillance with prurient intent; 
 
making a threat of mass violence; 
 
stalking; 
 
distributing revenge porn; and 
 
any other act that if committed by an adult would be a felony. 
 
Current Law:  A “school security officer” includes a school principal, school 
administrator, law enforcement officer, or other individual employed by a local school 
system or a local government who is designated by a county superintendent or a school 
principal to help maintain the security and safety of a school. 
 
When a student is arrested for a “reportable offense” or an offense related to the student’s 
membership in a criminal organization, the law enforcement agency making the arrest must 
notify (1) the local superintendent; (2) the school principal; and (3) if appropriate, the 
school security officer. The law enforcement agency may also notify the State’s Attorney. 
 
A reportable offense is an offense that (1) occurred off school premises; (2) did not occur 
at an event sponsored by the school; and (3) includes a crime of violence, as specified in 
the Criminal Law Article and numerous other specified weapons-, drug-, assault-, and 
theft‑related offenses. If a student is removed or excluded from the student’s regular school 
for a reportable offense, the student’s attorney (if applicable) must be invited to participate 
in a conference between the student or the student’s parent or guardian and the principal or 
county superintendent. 
 
The Criminal Law Article defines a crime of violence as any of 26 enumerated crimes, 
including abduction, arson, murder, rape, armed carjacking, and sexual offenses. 
 
Except by order of a juvenile (or other) court with good cause shown, information about a 
student’s arrest is confidential and may not be redisclosed, except as specified, and may 
not be part of the student’s permanent educational record. A superintendent may share the 
information as part of a confidential file with another superintendent or a nonpublic school 
in the State in which the student has enrolled. The information shared must include 
information regarding any educational programming and related services provided to the 
student. The State Board of Education is required to adopt regulations to ensure that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 123/ Page 3 
information obtained by local superintendents, principals, or school security officers is 
used only for specified educational purposes and is destroyed when the student graduates, 
otherwise permanently leaves school, or turns 22 years old, whichever comes first. 
 
Annually by December 30, MSDE must submit to the Governor and the General Assembly 
a report that includes specified information about each reportable offense for which a local 
school system received information in the preceding school year. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill alters the definition of “school security officer” (who is 
required to be notified regarding reportable offenses) to include an individual employed by 
an institution of higher education, but only if they are designated by a county 
superintendent or school principal to help maintain security and safety of a school. As it 
seems unlikely that a superintendent or principal would designate an individual employed 
by an institution of higher education as a security officer for a public school, that provision 
likely does not affect notification requirements for reportable offenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 951 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Independent College 
and University Association; Department of State Police; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3