START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 194 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 194 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Incarcerated Job Training Act 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to 
establish an Incarcerated Individual Apprenticeship Program (Apprenticeship Program), as 
an independent program that is separate from Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE), 
to provide incarcerated individuals the opportunity to serve as paid apprentices in an 
agency or a unit of State or local government or with a private entity. The bill establishes 
requirements for DPSCS and participating employers, including the requirement to 
determine the wage paid to an incarcerated individual that is not less than the State 
minimum wage. In addition, if an incarcerated individual successfully completes the 
program, within 30 days after the scheduled release of the incarcerated individual, DPSCS 
must provide the incarcerated individual with a certificate demonstrating successful 
completion of the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $297,300 in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization, inflation, and minimum ongoing costs. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
297,300 
345,700 
362,000 
378,500 
395,000 
Net Effect 
($297,300) 
($345,700) 
($362,000) 
($378,500) 
($395,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in expenditures for local governments that 
choose to participate in the Apprenticeship Program. Otherwise, the bill is enabling in 
nature and does not materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 194/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Apprenticeship Program must prioritize employment in skilled trades, 
with the purpose of assisting incarcerated individuals to develop marketable job skills and 
to provide incarcerated individuals with the opportunity to earn money that can be used 
once the incarcerated individual is released from incarceration. An incarcerated individual 
participating in the program is entitled to the same deductions or allowances for good 
behavior, observance of discipline and rules, and diligent and faithful labor, and is subject 
to the same forfeitures or punishments for bad behavior and other violations that otherwise 
apply to incarcerated individuals under State laws. 
 
DPSCS must assign Apprenticeship Program participants to eligible employers who are 
participating in the program. An employer may reject the department’s proposed 
assignment or cease participation in the program at any time. 
 
An employer who is an Apprenticeship Program participant must pay to DPSCS the 
amount agreed on, as part of the agreement for the program, for each day that an 
incarcerated individual is employed as part of the program. From the payments received, 
DPSCS must credit the amount held to the incarcerated individual’s account, as determined 
by the department. If DPSCS finds that the spouse, child, or other dependent of an 
incarcerated individual needs financial support, DPSCS may pay all or part of the payments 
made under the program, as DPSCS considers proper, to the spouse, child, or other 
dependent. 
 
The Division of Correction must provide or make arrangements that it considers to be 
adequate and proper to provide for the guarding, transporting, lodging, feeding, clothing, 
and medical and other care of an incarcerated individual while the incarcerated individual 
is participating in the Apprenticeship Program. If an incarcerated individual is assigned to 
an agency or a unit of State government as a participant in the program, the State must pay 
the expenses incurred. If an incarcerated individual is assigned to a municipality, county, 
or private entity, the municipality, county, or private entity must pay the expenses incurred 
under arrangements made with or satisfactory to DPSCS. 
 
DPSCS may adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions. 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, see the 
Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
Maryland Correctional Enterprises:  MCE provides work and job training for incarcerated 
individuals in State correctional facilities. MCE produces goods and supplies services at a 
cost that does not exceed the prevailing average market price. These goods and services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 194/ Page 3 
are used by local, State, and federal agencies. These goods are also available for use by 
charitable, civic, educational, fraternal, or religious organizations. 
 
Management Council:  The MCE Management Council is responsible for advising MCE 
on its specific proposals to establish new industries and improve the quality and quantity 
of job training programs and recommending the establishment and maintenance of 
industrial plants and service centers, as specified. In addition, the council must: 
 
 
review the operation of MCE programs to determine (1) whether there is undue 
competition with private enterprise and recommend necessary adjustments to 
prevent undue competition and (2) whether there is any negative impact on workers 
in the State, including wage depression or job displacement; 
 
review the standards for goods and services and the pricing schedules as 
recommended by the Chief Executive Officer of MCE; 
 
review the occupational health and safety record of programs and other working 
conditions of incarcerated individuals in MCE programs; 
 
review the success of MCE in (1) meeting the employability development needs of 
incarcerated individuals and (2) coordinating work programs with other 
rehabilitative programs; 
 
solicit and review information pertaining to concerns of participating incarcerated 
individuals; 
 
recommend changes as necessary to meet the goals and objectives of MCE; 
 
solicit ideas, proposals, and suggestions from business representatives, nonprofit 
organizations, government entities, and members of the public as to how MCE could 
enhance the work experience of incarcerated individuals and increase the ability of 
incarcerated individuals to obtain gainful employment after release; 
 
review and recommend opportunities with private sector employers to expand the 
Prison Industries Enhancement Program; 
 
review and identify ways to improve the business practices of MCE in its sales, 
marketing, inventory, warehousing, and product line operations; 
 
monitor customer satisfaction with price, quality, delivery, and after delivery 
service; and 
 
review and comment on MCE operating and capital budgets, including cash 
forecasts. 
 
Council members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses, as specified. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $297,310 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 194/ Page 4 
reflects the cost of hiring one program coordinator, one administrative aide, and 
two correctional officers to develop and implement the Apprenticeship Program, including 
supervising the apprentices when they are at their workplace. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$260,747 
Operating Expenses 
    36,563 
Minimum FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$297,310 
 
Future year expenditures – which reflect minimum costs – reflect full salaries with annual 
increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any costs for transporting program participants to 
participating employers (which may involve the purchase of new vehicles). In addition, 
this estimate assumes that the Apprenticeship Program is established and operated at 
one DPSCS correctional facility. DPSCS advises that it operates six facilities classified as 
pre-release with individuals who may meet the criteria for participation in the 
Apprenticeship Program. However, at this time, the need to establish and operate the 
program at multiple DPSCS facilities is unclear. To the extent that the program is 
implemented in additional facilities, the need for additional staff and transportation 
increases, and general fund expenditures increase further. To the extent that private 
employers participate, some costs may be mitigated since the employer must pay all 
security, transportation, and related costs. 
 
This estimate also does not include any costs for any State agencies that elect to participate 
in the program, as employers, to pay wages to participating incarcerated individuals. 
Accordingly, State expenditures (multiple fund types) could increase further. 
 
DPSCS can adopt regulations with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 289 of 2025 and HB 1405 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Howard and Prince George’s 
counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 194/ Page 5 
Department of the Environment; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 194/ Page 6 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a  
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
Additionally, Chapter 2 of 2025 (discussed further below) established the Maryland Office 
of Registered Apprenticeship Development (MORAD) within DWDAL’s Maryland 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 194/ Page 7 
Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP) for the purpose of scaling registered 
apprenticeships across industries and occupations to meet the needs of the State’s economy. 
 
According to MD Labor and as of September 2025, the total number of registered 
apprenticeships in Maryland is over 13,000, with over 1,400 apprentices graduating from 
their programs during 2025. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission 
 
Chapter 168 of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. The purpose of the 
commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill shortages in  
high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways for young 
people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023, ten times in 2024, and once 
in 2025 and published interim and final reports January 2024 and March 2025, respectively. 
Additionally, the University of Baltimore Schafer Center, as part of its contract to provide 
support staff to the commission, undertook a Survey of Employers and Labor Unions and 
published findings on the prevalence of, barriers to, and benefits of apprenticeships in 
February 2025. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act 
 
Chapter 2, the RAISE Act, operationalized multiple recommendations from the 
Apprenticeship 2030 Commission’s interim and final reports. Specifically, Chapter 2 
establishes (1) MORAD within MATP to scale registered apprenticeships across industries 
to meet the needs of the State’s economy; (2) the Registered Apprenticeship Qualified 
Intermediary Program within MATP to increase apprenticeship awareness, connect 
employers and labor organizations with partners, and provide technical assistance to launch 
and expand apprenticeships; (3) the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 194/ Page 8 
Board to advise MORAD on the strategy to achieve its mission of expanding registered 
apprenticeship opportunities in the State; and (4) the Maryland Pay Per Apprentice 
Program and associated special fund to provide grants to employers and sponsors to 
develop a well-trained, productive workforce that meets the needs of the State’s economy 
and help offset apprenticeship costs. 
 
Recent Reports and Publications 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 
The 2024 and 2025 JCR directed multiple agencies to collect data relevant to 
apprenticeship in the State in accordance with the interim and final recommendations of 
the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. This included reports from: 
 
 
the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Department of Juvenile Services on 
Public Safety Apprenticeship; 
 
the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission on Apprenticeships in 
Maryland Hospitals; 
 
the Maryland Insurance Administration on Efforts to Support Insurance Industry 
Apprenticeships; 
 
the Maryland Department of Health on a Registered Nurse Degree Apprenticeship 
Program Study; 
 
the Public Service Commission of Maryland on Apprenticeships Within Public 
Service Companies; and 
 
the Maryland Department of Budget and Management on Public Service Registered 
Apprenticeships within State Government. 
 

END OF PAGE 8