START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 134 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 134 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Incapacitated or Protected Persons - Petition for Visitation 
 
 
This bill establishes a rebuttable presumption that it is in the best interest of an “alleged 
incapacitated or protected person” to have visitation from (1) the spouse of the person, if 
the spouse and the person are not legally separated; (2) the adult children of the person; 
(3) the adult grandchildren of the person; (4) the parents of the person; (5) the adult siblings 
of the person; and (6) other interested parties. Such persons may petition the court for 
reasonable visitation with the alleged incapacitated or protected person. The bill prohibits 
a petition if the authorized decision maker of the alleged incapacitated or protected person 
is a public guardian. The bill establishes a petition process, court procedures, and a 
requirement for an authorized decision maker to provide specified information about the 
alleged incapacitated or protected person to an interested party on written request.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly to recognize the 
right of every adult in the State to have visitation with whomever the adult chooses, unless 
a court has specifically ordered otherwise or the adult is incapacitated and the visitation is 
not in the adult’s best interest.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 134/ Page 2 
Petition for Visitation 
 
A petition for visitation must be verified and state facts showing (1) the petitioner is a 
person eligible for visitation, as specified by the bill; (2) that visitation by the petitioner 
with the alleged incapacitated person has been unreasonably interfered with or denied; and 
(3) the identity of the person or persons who have unreasonably interfered with or denied 
visitation. A petition must also include a statement by the petitioner that the petitioner 
agrees to abide by any order of the court issued as a condition of evaluating the petition 
and the petitioner, including a background check, judgment search, or mental health 
screening or evaluation.  
 
The petitioner must personally serve a copy of the petition on:   
 
 
the alleged incapacitated or protected person; 
 
the attorney for the alleged incapacitated or protected person; 
 
the guardian of the person of the alleged incapacitated or protected person, if any; 
 
the authorized decision maker for the alleged incapacitated or protected person; 
 
the attending physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant for the alleged 
incapacitated or protected person; 
 
the principal administrator, or the administrator’s designee, and the medical director 
of a health care facility providing services to the alleged incapacitated or protected 
person, if any; and 
 
any person alleged to have interfered with or denied visitation. 
 
Hearings and Court Procedures 
 
At any hearing on the petition, if evidence is presented that the alleged incapacitated or 
protected person objects to the petition or has in the past expressed an objection to visitation 
by the petitioner, the burden of proof for the rebuttable presumption must shift to the 
petitioner to prove, by clear and convincing evidence, that the alleged incapacitated or 
protected person’s current or prior objection was not based on reliable evidence.  
 
The presumption for visitation may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence that the 
visitation would not be in the best interests of the alleged incapacitated or protected person 
because, among other things, (1) the petitioner has committed physical or financial abuse 
or neglect or has been the subject of a protective order issued by a court that restricted or 
prohibited conduct by the petitioner; (2) visitation is contrary to the wishes of the alleged 
incapacitated or protected person; or (3) the visitation would be harmful to the health or 
mental state of the alleged incapacitated or protected person.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 134/ Page 3 
In a ruling on a petition, the court must issue a statement of facts and law. The court may 
impose reasonable restrictions on a visitation ordered, including time and frequency 
limitations and requiring that visitations be monitored at the petitioner’s expense. The court 
may assess costs of the petition or visitation, including the cost of monitoring visits, to the 
petitioner.  
 
The court may assess sanctions, in the amount of the reasonable attorney’s fees incurred, 
against a petitioner who files a petition in bad faith or against a party that is claimed to 
have unjustifiably interfered with or denied visitation. No costs or sanctions may be 
assessed against the alleged incapacitated or protected person who is the subject of the 
petition.  
 
An authorized decision maker, a health care facility, or an employee or agent of a health 
care facility who denies or restricts a visit or visitation must be immune from civil liability 
if the restriction or denial is based on (1) a court order issued to deny or restrict visitation 
or (2) a good faith belief that a visit or visitation is not in the best interest of an alleged 
incapacitated or protected person.  
 
Notification Requirements 
 
On written request by an interested party, an authorized decision maker must, within 
72 hours after receipt of the request, identify in writing or by electronic communication 
(1) the health care facility or other location where the alleged incapacitated or protected 
person is residing; (2) all current funeral arrangements; or (3) the burial location or 
disposition of the body of the deceased alleged incapacitated or protected person.  
 
Definitions 
 
“Interested party” means a person who is (1) appointed as a guardian of the person or as a 
guardian of the property; (2) an agent under an advance directive, as specified; (3) a 
surrogate decision maker; or (4) an attorney in fact under a durable power of attorney, as 
specified. An interested party does not include persons appointed under a public 
guardianship, as specified in § 13‐707 of the Estates and Trusts Article. 
 
“Visit” or “visitation” means any in‑person meeting, or any telephonic, mail, or electronic 
communication between the petitioner and the alleged incapacitated or protected person. 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not explicitly address visitation in the manner and to the extent 
provided under the bill.   
 
For example, in regard to guardianship cases, while guardians of the person of a disabled 
person have general authority to direct the activities of a disabled person, there are no State 
statutory provisions that specifically limit or grant a guardian’s authority to restrict or 
prohibit communication or visitation with adult family members or other individuals.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 134/ Page 4 
Generally, a court may grant to a guardian of a person only those powers necessary to 
provide for the demonstrated need of the disabled person. The rights, duties, and powers 
that the court may order include:   
 
 
the same rights, powers, and duties that a parent has with respect to an 
unemancipated minor child, except that the guardian is not liable solely by reason 
of the guardianship to third persons for any act of the disabled person;  
 
the right to custody of the disabled person and to establish his or her place of abode, 
within and without the State, provided there is court authorization for any change in 
the classification of abode, except that no one may be committed to a mental facility 
without an involuntary commitment proceeding, as specified;  
 
the duty to provide for care, comfort, and maintenance, including social, 
recreational, and friendship requirements, and, if appropriate, for training and 
education of the disabled person; and 
 
if it is in the best interest of the disabled person, the duty to foster and preserve 
family relationships including, as appropriate, assisting to arrange visitation and 
communication by telephone calls, personal mail, and electronic communications.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4