START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 165 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 165 
(Delegate Bouchat) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courts - Sheriffs' Salaries - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the annual salary of the Sheriff in numerous counties to be equivalent to that 
of the State’s Attorney in the respective county. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, 
the salary structure specified in the bill takes effect at the beginning of the next terms of 
office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures for most counties affected by the bill likely increase by 
varying amounts annually beginning in FY 2027. No effect on local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The salaries of county Sheriffs are generally addressed in Title 2, Subtitle 3 
of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, while salaries for State’s Attorneys are 
generally addressed in Title 15, Subtitle 4 of the Criminal Procedure Article. For some 
jurisdictions, a salary amount is explicitly stated; for others, the salary amount indicated in 
statute is not explicitly stated but instead correlates to that of another State or local official 
(e.g., a certain percentage of the salary of a District Court judge or equivalent to the salary 
of a lieutenant colonel in the Department of State Police at a certain grade/step). Statutory 
provisions relevant to other jurisdictions only broadly indicate the method by which a 
salary is to be determined (e.g., a salary as set by the local jurisdiction). 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 165/ Page 2 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public officer from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the Counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures generally are assumed to increase by varying 
amounts annually beginning in fiscal 2027, once new terms of office begin. Exhibit 1 
reflects the current salaries for Sheriffs in the counties affected by the bill, as well as the 
current salaries for the State’s Attorneys in the respective counties. Under the bill, the 
salary for a Sheriff in one of the affected jurisdictions is to equal the salary of the local 
State’s Attorney. As illustrated in Exhibit 1, based on current salary levels, this is assumed 
to result in a higher salary for the Sheriff in most jurisdictions, thereby increasing salary 
expenditures. The Department of Legislative Services notes that in many instances, future 
salary amounts depend on action taken by the General Assembly regarding judicial salaries 
(as referenced above, in many jurisdictions, the salary of the State’s Attorney is equivalent 
to a certain percentage of the salary of a District or circuit court judge). Legislation to 
increase judicial salaries has been introduced this session (Senate Joint Resolution 2/ 
House Joint Resolution 6) based on recommendations proposed by the Judicial 
Compensation Commission; however, because the General Assembly has the authority to 
further amend the resolution, as specified in statute, judicial salaries for the next four years 
cannot be reliably predicted in advance. Additionally, some jurisdictions that locally set 
salaries for impacted officials have already established a salary structure for upcoming 
terms of office. For example, Wicomico County advises it has already passed a resolution 
to increase the salary of the Sheriff over the next four‐year term. Accordingly, the 
information presented in Exhibit 1 is for context only and not indicative of future salary 
expenditure impacts in each jurisdiction. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 165/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Current Salaries of Sheriffs and State’s Attorneys 
 
County 
Sheriff 
State’s Attorney 
Allegany 
$100,000 
$181,200 
Calvert 
189,526 
214,433 
Caroline 
145,463 
171,133 
Carroll 
191,078 
201,333 
Cecil 
150,000 
191,266 
Dorchester 
128,853 
161,066 
Frederick 
125,000 
234,993 
Garrett 
128,853 
161,066 
Harford 
202,199 
201,333 
Kent 
128,853 
161,066 
St. Mary’s 
189,526 
214,433 
Somerset* 
85,000 
161,066 
Talbot 
139,373 
161,066 
Washington 
163,080 
181,200 
Wicomico 
117,000 
181,200 
Worcester 
101,192 
181,200 
 
* Somerset County reports an annual salary of $85,000 for the Sheriff; however, the Department of 
Legislative Services notes that § 2-333 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article indicates that the 
salary is to be no less than $105,000. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Dorchester, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, 
Kent, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, Washington, Wicomico, and Worcester counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 165/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4