START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 148 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 148 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection and Labor and Employment - Surveillance-Based Price 
and Wage Setting - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits surveillance-based price setting and specifies that the practice is 
considered an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice and constitutes a violation of the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). The bill also prohibits surveillance-based 
wage setting, except under limited circumstances, and authorizes the Commissioner of 
Labor and Industry in the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) to investigate and 
take specified actions after receiving a written complaint about the practice from an 
employee. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $349,400 in FY 2027 for staff needed 
to enforce the bill’s prohibitions. Future years reflect annualization, ongoing operating 
expenses, and the elimination of one-time costs. The bill’s imposition of existing penalty 
provisions is not anticipated to have a material impact on general fund revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
349,400 
410,900 
430,000 
449,300 
468,800 
Net Effect 
($349,400) 
($410,900) 
($430,000) 
($449,300) 
($468,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to 
have a material impact on local government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 148/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions  
 
“Automated decision system” means a system, software, or a process that uses computation 
to assist, approximate, or replace human decision making. It includes a system, software, 
or a process derived from machine learning, statistics, or other data processing or artificial 
intelligence (AI) techniques. It does not include passive computing infrastructure. 
 
“Surveillance-based price setting” means the use of surveillance data in conjunction with 
an automated decision system to offer or inform a customized price for a good or service 
for a specific individual or group of individuals in the State.  
 
“Surveillance data” means data obtained through observation, inference, or surveillance of 
an individual relating to personal or genetic information, behavior, or biometrics of the 
individual or a group, band, class, or tier to which the individual belongs. It includes data 
gathered, purchased, or otherwise acquired. 
 
“Surveillance-based wage setting” means the use of surveillance data in conjunction with 
an automated decision system to offer or inform a customized wage for a specific employee 
or group of employees in the State. 
 
Surveillance-based Price Setting 
 
The prohibition against surveillance-based pricing setting does not apply to a person that 
offers a customized price to a consumer or group of consumers when the different prices:   
 
 
are based on differences in cost to provide a good or service to different consumers; 
or 
 
reflect a discount or reward offered to all consumers on equal terms under specified 
conditions related to accessibility and eligibility.  
 
Any surveillance data used to offer a customized price may not be used for any other 
purpose, including profiling, targeted advertising, or the setting of a price in any other 
manner. 
 
Surveillance-based Wage Setting 
 
The prohibition against surveillance-based wage setting does not apply to an employer 
who:   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 148/ Page 3 
 
offers a customized wage based on data specific to an employee that is directly 
related to the task the employee was hired to perform or based on the location where 
the employee works and the cost of living in that location; and 
 
before hiring an employee whose wages are set in whole or in part through an 
automated decision system, discloses in plain language to the employee what data 
is considered and how the automated decision system considers the data.  
 
The prohibition does not diminish the right of covered employees to collectively bargain 
over terms and conditions of employment in excess of the protections granted by State law. 
 
If, after investigating a complaint, the commissioner determines that the prohibition has 
been violated, the commissioner must either try to resolve any issues involved in the 
violation informally by mediation or ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf 
of the applicant or employee. The Attorney General is authorized to bring an action in the 
county where the violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Artificial Intelligence  
 
“AI” means a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of human-defined 
objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual 
environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual 
environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an automated 
manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action. 
 
For additional information on the status of AI in the State and nation, please see the 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
Price Regulation  
 
State law generally does not regulate price setting in the manner specified by the bill. 
However, various provisions of State law address the practice of adjusting or advertising 
prices for consumer goods and services. For example, Chapters 630 and 631 of 2023 
prohibit a person from selling a good or service designated as essential (including a repair 
or reconstruction service) for a price that exceeds a specified threshold during and, in some 
cases, after a state of emergency. Additionally, a seller is prohibited from increasing the 
layaway price of a consumer good that is sold under a layaway agreement. 
 
Chapter 818 of 2017 explicitly prohibited a manufacturer or whole distributor of 
prescription drugs from engaging in price gouging in the sale of an essential off-patent or 
generic drug; however, the law was declared unconstitutional as a violation of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 148/ Page 4 
federal Commerce Clause in Association for Accessible Medicines. v. Frosh, 887 F.3d 664 
(4th Cir. 2018). 
 
Employment Discrimination  
 
State law generally prohibits an employer with at least 15 employees from discharging, 
failing or refusing to hire, or otherwise discriminating against any individual with respect 
to the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because 
of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, genetic information, military status, or disability. The State and local governments 
are considered employers.  
 
Regardless of employer size, under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law, an employer 
may not discriminate between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable 
employment opportunities based on sex, race, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, 
disability, or gender identity. An employer is also prohibited from paying a wage to 
employees at a rate less than the rate paid to other employees working in the same 
establishment and performing comparable work, as specified, if the pay difference is based 
on race, religious beliefs, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation. The State and local 
governments are considered employers.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division within the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is 
responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved consumers. 
The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a 
civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 
for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. In addition 
to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 148/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:   
 
Office of the Attorney General – Consumer Protection Division 
 
OAG does not currently have the technical expertise needed to investigate and enforce the 
bill’s prohibition against surveillance-based price setting. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures for OAG increase by $221,956 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one technologist 
and one assistant Attorney General, both with specialized expertise in the use of AI, to 
handle responsibilities necessary to enforce the bill, including the investigation of 
complaints. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$203,674 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$221,956 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
The bill creates new enforcement responsibilities for MD Labor for which it does not have 
sufficient existing staff. Therefore, general fund expenditures for MD Labor increase by 
$127,404 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time investigator and one half-time assistant 
Attorney General to handle the responsibilities necessary to enforce the bill’s requirements 
related to surveillance-based wage setting, including the investigation of complaints, 
mediation attempts, and case referrals to OAG. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$106,930 
Operating Expenses 
     20,474 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$127,404 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The estimate assumes a 
relatively low volume of complaints that must be investigated by MD Labor under the bill. 
To the extent that the number of complaints is greater, MD Labor may need additional 
investigators and/or a full-time assistant Attorney General to adequately enforce the bill’s 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 148/ Page 6 
prohibition against surveillance-based wage setting. To the extent additional staff are 
needed, general fund expenditures increase accordingly in the out years.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 148/ Page 7 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise provide 
additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some students use AI 
to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems that 
host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased energy 
costs; 
 Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to make 
“deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to differentiate from 
actual events; 
 AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data privacy. 
 Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 148/ Page 8 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s AI 
Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and ongoing 
assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State government; 
 prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data that 
meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for the 
operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to receive 
federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the Chief Data 
Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that employ 
high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 148/ Page 9 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 148/ Page 10 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 10