START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 103 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Consumer Contracts - Prohibited Waiver 
 
 
This bill prohibits a consumer contract from waiving, limiting, impairing, or disclaiming 
any right conferred or created or a manner of enforcement established by federal or State 
law. The bill generally prohibits a waiver by agreement of its requirements, except under 
limited circumstances. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice 
under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil penalty 
provisions. In addition to an action for damages under MCPA, a person may bring an action 
for declaratory relief or an injunction to prohibit a person who violates the bill from 
engaging (or continuing to engage) in the violation. The bill incorporates these provisions 
within Chapter 194 of 2025, which establishes that a provision in a consumer contract that 
sets a shorter period of time to bring an action under or on the contract than required by 
State law when the contract is issued or delivered is against State policy, illegal, and void. 
Although the bill generally maintains the provisions of Chapter 194, it repeals certain 
exemptions. The bill also contains a severability clause and only applies prospectively. The 
bill takes effect on the later of October 1, 2026, or the taking effect of Chapter 194 
(June 1, 2026), if the effective date of Chapter 194 is amended. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 103/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  As noted above, Chapter 194 establishes that a provision 
in a consumer contract that sets a shorter period of time to bring an action under or on the 
contract than required by State law when the contract is issued or delivered is against State 
policy, illegal, and void. However, this provision does not apply to:  (1) any consumer 
contract provided by a business, including an affiliate or subsidiary of the business, that is 
doing business under a license, franchise agreement, certificate, or other authorization 
issued by a State agency, political subdivision, or public utility commission; (2) a service 
regulated by the Maryland Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications 
Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; or (3) a person or business 
licensed to provide security system services under Title 18 of the Business Occupations 
and Professions Article. The bill repeals these exemptions.  
 
As with Chapter 194, the bill prohibits a court from giving effect to a provision in a 
consumer contract that is illegal. Additionally, the bill specifies that a court must enforce 
the remainder of the consumer contract to the extent practicable.  
 
The bill (and the requirements of Chapter 194) must be construed to apply equally and 
without favorable treatment to a consumer contract with or without an arbitration provision. 
Likewise, the bill and Chapter 194 may not be construed to (1) invalidate an arbitration 
provision that is enforceable under the Federal Arbitration Act or (2) prohibit a provision 
in a consumer contract that grants a consumer a right or a manner of enforcement more 
expansive or extensive than a right conferred or created or a means or manner of 
enforcement established by federal or State law. A consumer may waive a right conferred 
or created or a manner of enforcement established by federal or State law as part of a 
settlement of a dispute or an action, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 103/ Page 3 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Public Service Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3