START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 128 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 128 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Therapy Dogs - Policy for Handling and Use in 
Schools 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education to allow, and adopt a policy for, the use of 
therapy dogs in public schools, and requires a handler to accompany each therapy dog in 
school. The policy must include (1) certification requirements for therapy dogs; 
(2) guidelines for handlers; (3) guidelines for when and where therapy dogs and handlers 
are allowed in school buildings; (4) notification requirements; and (5) guidelines for the 
management of students and staff with allergies or who are uncomfortable around dogs. 
Under the bill, a “therapy dog” is a dog that is trained to provide affection and comfort to 
children who need emotional support in a school setting and is certified or registered as a 
therapy dog. A “handler” is an individual who provides care and training for the therapy 
dog. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local school systems. 
 
Local Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, local school systems that currently do not allow for 
the use of therapy dogs in public schools experience operational changes, but any 
associated costs are likely to be minimal and absorbable within existing resources, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  With the assistance of the Local Health Department (LHD), each local 
board of education must provide adequate school health services, instruction in health 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 128/ Page 2 
education, and a healthful school environment. The Maryland State Department of 
Education and the Maryland Health Department must jointly develop public standards and 
guidelines for school health programs and offer assistance to the local boards of education 
and LHDs in their implementation. Each local school system must designate a school 
health services program coordinator, but it may authorize the LHD to designate a 
coordinator. 
 
State law does not require local boards of education to allow the use of therapy dogs in 
public schools. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Each local board of education must allow the use of therapy dogs 
under the bill, but a local board does not have to provide therapy dogs or provide or pay 
for their certification, registration, training, or a handler. School systems experience 
operational effects, to the extent they do not currently allow the use of therapy dogs in 
public schools. This analysis assumes that each local board of education may decide how 
permissive or expansive its policy will be regarding the use of therapy dogs and that some 
school systems may benefit from volunteer and nonprofit involvement in provision of 
therapy dog services. Therefore, any costs to local school systems due to the bill are 
minimal and absorbable within existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 299 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 128/ Page 3 
 

END OF PAGE 3