START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 162 
(Delegate Queen) 
Health 
 
 
Department of Aging - Maryland Access Point - Dementia-Friendly Communities 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to provide resources, 
training, grants, and other support to the Maryland Access Point (MAP) network to create 
“dementia-friendly communities” through community-based efforts. MAP must provide 
public awareness and educational materials to communities regarding dementia.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOA general fund expenditures increase by at least $144,700 in FY 2027 
for staff and printing and distribution of public awareness and educational materials, as 
discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
144,700 
161,900 
167,100 
172,300 
177,700 
Net Effect 
($144,700) 
($161,900) 
($167,100) 
($172,300) 
($177,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local MAP offices may support dementia friendly community operations 
under the bill. To the extent that MDOA provides grant funding to local offices, revenues 
and expenditures increase accordingly beginning as early as fiscal 2027.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Dementia-friendly community” means a village, town, city, or county 
that (1) is informed, safe, and respectful of individuals living with dementia, families of 
individuals living with dementia, and care partners and (2) provides supportive options that 
foster quality of life for individuals with dementia. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 162/ Page 2 
MAP must, using its available resources, provide public awareness and educational 
materials to communities regarding dementia, including community-based ways to 
(1) reduce the stigma of dementia; (2) promote understanding, empathy, and tolerance; 
(3) make physical environments safe, accessible, and easy to navigate through clear 
signage and accessible infrastructure; (4) foster socially inclusive environments in which 
individuals with dementia can maintain social connections and networks, participate in 
community life, and feel a sense of belonging; and (5) facilitate specialized training for 
first responders, local businesses, public agencies, and community groups that encourage 
staff to be more aware and supportive of individuals with dementia.  
 
Current Law:  MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the delivery of services for, and 
advocates on behalf of, older adults at all levels of government. The department also 
administers programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older Americans 
Act. Most of the direct services funded by MDOA are delivered through area agencies on 
aging (AAAs). In Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designate an AAA. 
The agency may be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. AAAs 
provide a variety of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, and 
temporary disability programs. 
 
Maryland Access Point 
 
Federal law defines an “Aging and Disability Resource Center” as an entity, network, or 
consortium established by a state as a part of the state system of long-term care, to provide 
a coordinated and integrated system for older individuals and individuals with disabilities 
(and their caregivers) that provides, in collaboration with AAAs, centers for independent 
living and other aging or disability entities. Maryland’s Aging and Disability Resource 
Center is Maryland Access Point. The purpose of the program is to provide a coordinated 
system of information and access for individuals seeking long-term services and supports, 
including in-home, community-based, and institutional services. MAP must, using its 
available resources, provide: 
 
 
options counseling; 
 
assistance concerning aging and disability issues and long-term services and 
supports planning; 
 
written materials regarding the availability of program services; 
 
a public database that can be accessed and searched on the Internet, of resources and 
services that could be useful to individuals who may need long-term services and 
supports and their caregivers, as well as those involved in long-term services and 
supports; and  
 
other related services necessary for the program’s success. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 162/ Page 3 
MDOA must administer, supervise, and coordinate MAP with the cooperation of the 
Department of Disabilities, the Department of Human Services, the Governor’s Office of 
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, and the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). Local 
MAP offices must be designated throughout the State to ensure easy access to the program.  
 
Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Council  
 
The Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Council must (1) update 
the State Plan on Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders and advocate for the State 
plan; (2) examine the needs for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders 
and their caregivers and identify methods through which the State can most effectively and 
efficiently assist in meeting those needs; (3) advise the Governor and the General Assembly 
on policy, funding, regulatory, and other issues related to individuals with Alzheimer’s 
disease and related disorders and their caregivers; and (4) develop and promote strategies 
to encourage brain health and reduce cognitive decline. 
 
Dementia Public Awareness  
 
MDH, in partnership with MDOA, the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related 
Dementias Council, and the Greater Maryland Chapter of the Alzheimer’s Association, 
must incorporate information into relevant public health outreach programs administered 
by MDH to:   
 
 
educate health care providers regarding (1) the importance of early detection and 
timely diagnosis of cognitive impairment; (2) validated assessment tools for the 
detection and diagnosis of cognitive impairment; (3) the value of a Medicare annual 
wellness visit or other annual physical for an individual at least 65 years old for 
cognitive health; (4) the Medicare care planning billing code for individuals with 
cognitive impairment; and (5) treatments approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, including 
relevant information on treatment use and outcomes; and  
 
increase public understanding and awareness of (1) the early warning signs of 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias; (2) the value of early detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias; (3) how to 
reduce the risk of cognitive decline, particularly among individuals in Black and 
Latino communities who are at greater risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementias; and (4) FDA-approved treatments and relevant information on 
treatment use and outcomes. 
 
Chapters 681 and 682 of 2025 require MDH, in collaboration with the State-designated 
health information exchange, to establish and maintain a publicly accessible website that 
includes specified information regarding Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias in a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 162/ Page 4 
downloadable format, which must be updated annually. The website must include (1) the 
prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias in the State; (2) the 
hospitalization rate related to Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias; and (3) to the 
extent possible, the prevalence and hospitalization rate of Alzheimer’s disease and related 
dementias disaggregated based on age (including age of diagnosis), sex, race, ethnicity, 
number of cases by county, co-occurrence of Down Syndrome (trisomy-21), and type of 
dementia. 
 
Long-Term Care and Dementia Care Navigation Program  
 
Chapters 667 and 668 of 2023 established the Long-Term Care and Dementia Care 
Navigation Program, requiring local AAAs to establish or build upon existing dementia 
care navigation programs for their jurisdictions. Dementia care navigation programs are 
intended to provide support to persons living with dementia and their care partners to 
mitigate the impact of dementia and ensure their access to quality dementia care navigation 
services. The duties of the navigation program include:  
 
 
providing information and referrals to long-term care and chronic disease services; 
 
providing cognitive screening for individuals concerned with their cognition;  
 
providing programs that engage individuals who demonstrate symptoms of 
dementia that interfere with activities of daily living (ADLs), regular exercise, and 
social activities;  
 
providing support for caregivers of individuals who demonstrate symptoms of 
dementia that interfere with ADLs;  
 
consulting with and providing technical assistance to AAA staff who interact with 
individuals with dementia diagnoses or cognitive changes that may be associated 
with dementia; and 
 
establishing relationships with health care providers to facilitate contact between 
health care providers and individuals who demonstrate symptoms of dementia that 
interfere with ADLs as well as the caregivers of such individuals. 
 
The services provided by the navigation programs must be provided along with single 
point-of-entry programs and services for frail or health-impaired seniors. The work of the 
navigation programs must be guided by the recommendations of the State Plan on Aging 
and the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Council. 
 
Dementia‑friendly Programs in Maryland 
 
In Maryland, there are dementia-friendly programs in Baltimore, Frederick, 
Prince George’s, and Washington counties.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 162/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MDOA to provide MAP with resources, training, 
grants, and other support to create dementia-friendly communities through 
community‑based efforts. MAP must provide public awareness and educational materials 
to communities regarding dementia. 
 
At a minimum, MDOA general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $144,709 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one dementia‑friendly coordinator to provide resources, training, 
and educational materials to local MAP offices and assist community‑based efforts to 
create dementia‑friendly communities. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start‑up costs, and ongoing operating expenses (including $50,000 in annual costs for the 
printing and distribution of public awareness and educational materials). 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$85,568 
Public Awareness and Educational Materials 
50,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$144,709 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not reflect any potential grant funding that may support 
dementia‑friendly communities. To the extent grant funding is provided, general fund 
expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate amount beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027. For illustrative purposes only, if 10 counties were to seek to establish a 
dementia‑friendly community and each received $10,000 in grant funding, MDOA general 
fund expenditures would increase by an additional $100,000.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to MDH, more than 148,000 Marylanders are living 
with Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Dementia Friendly America offers 
technical assistance, sector-specific guidance, training materials, provides tools, and a 
community toolkit to guide communities to adopt dementia-friendly practices.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 162/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6