START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 183 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 183 
(Delegate Bouchat, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program (VEIP) that is jointly 
administered by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment (MDE). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by approximately $46.5 
million in FY 2027 and $67.1 million in 2031, reflecting the loss of VEIP fee revenues 
(including late fees). TTF expenditures decrease by approximately $14.5 million in FY 
2027 and $19.3 million annually thereafter due to the elimination of contractual services 
and administrative costs related to VEIP. The decrease in TTF expenditures and revenues 
also affects MDE, which is reimbursed for its administrative costs (totaling approximately 
$1.2 million annually) through TTF. The bill also has a significant operational impact on 
MVA and MDE, with 21 total positions (combined) potentially no longer needed once 
VEIP operations end. Other potentially significant effects are not quantified but are 
discussed below.  
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($46.5) 
($63.2) 
($64.5) 
($65.8) 
($67.1) 
ReimB. Rev. 
($0.9) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
SF Expenditure 
($14.5) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
ReimB. Exp. 
($0.9) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
Net Effect 
($32.0) 
($43.9) 
($45.2) 
($46.5) 
($47.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 183/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 23, Subtitle 2 of the Transportation Article generally requires all 
model year 1977 and newer vehicles in the State to be inspected and tested every two years, 
unless specifically exempt. MVA and MDE must set the VEIP fee for each vehicle to be 
inspected and tested, which may not exceed $30 through June 30, 2026. The current fee is 
$30 but must be adjusted in future fiscal years to account for changes in the Consumer 
Price Index, as required by the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025.  
 
Statutory Waivers/Exemptions 
 
A vehicle owner must be granted a waiver from the VEIP inspection requirement if the 
vehicle fails to pass the exhaust emissions test but the owner provides specified evidence 
of payment for emissions-related repairs. 
 
Persons with special disability registration plates, persons age 70 or older, and deployed 
military personnel are eligible for an exemption from the inspection requirement under 
specified circumstances (MVA/MDE regulations refer to these exemptions as “waivers”). 
 
Any fire or rescue apparatus or ambulance owned or leased by a political subdivision of 
the State, or by a volunteer fire company, rescue squad, or volunteer ambulance company, 
registered as an emergency vehicle is exempt from VEIP inspections. 
 
Regulations 
 
Section 23-207 of the Transportation Article authorizes MVA and the Secretary of the 
Environment to jointly adopt rules and regulations for purposes of implementation, 
administration, regulation, and enforcement of the provisions of the VEIP statute, including 
rules and regulations that, consistent with federal law, exempt certain vehicles from the 
inspections and tests under the program. 
 
MVA/MDE regulations establish various additional exemptions, including exempting 
vehicles not registered in the “emissions inspection area” (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, 
Calvert, 
Carroll, 
Cecil, 
Charles, 
Frederick, 
Harford, 
Howard, 
Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, and Washington counties, and Baltimore City). Diesel 
vehicles are regulated under a separate program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Direct Program Costs and Revenues 
  
The bill has a significant fiscal and operational impact on MVA and MDE. Vehicles in the 
State must be tested biennially, although there are various waivers and exemptions in place 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 183/ Page 3 
(as noted above) that may delay or eliminate the testing requirement. In fiscal 2025, there 
were 1,269,420 initial tests performed and VEIP generated approximately $32.0 million in 
revenue for TTF, including $18.4 million in test fees and $13.6 million in late fees. 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, based on MVA’s current projections and the recent fee increases 
established by the BRFA of 2025, TTF revenues decrease by an estimated $46.5 million in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. In fiscal 2031, 
TTF revenues decrease by approximately $67.1 million. Although most of the revenue 
decrease is attributable to the loss of initial testing fees, more than one-third is attributable 
to late fee revenues for individuals who do not obtain a VEIP test on time. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Impact of Eliminating the Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Testing Fee Revenues 
($29.3) 
($39.8) 
($40.6) 
($41.4) 
($42.2) 
Late Fee Revenues 
(17.3) 
(23.5) 
(23.9) 
(24.4) 
(24.9) 
Total TTF Revenues 
($46.5) 
($63.2) 
($64.5) 
($65.8) 
($67.1) 
Contractual Services  
($11.0) 
($14.6) 
($14.6) 
($14.6) 
($14.6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MVA Expenditures 
(2.6) 
(3.5) 
(3.5) 
(3.5) 
(3.5) 
MDE Expenditures 
(0.9) 
(1.2) 
(1.2) 
(1.2) 
(1.2) 
Total Expenditures 
($14.5) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
($19.3) 
Net Impact 
($32.0) 
($43.9) 
($45.2) 
($46.5) 
($47.8) 
 
MDE:  Maryland Department of the Environment 
MVA:  Motor Vehicle Administration 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
TTF expenditures are estimated to decrease by approximately $14.5 million in fiscal 2027, 
accounting for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by $19.3 million in subsequent 
years due to the elimination of contractual services for the vendor operating the program 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 183/ Page 4 
and a decrease in MVA/MDE expenditures for staff and other operational costs. MVA 
advises the VEIP contract is for a five-year period (ending June 30, 2030). Annual expenses 
support the day-to-day management and operation of centralized VEIP stations and  
24/7 kiosks. Contract expenditures include personnel costs for approximately  
150 positions, supplies, and materials along with other operating costs. MVA notes that, 
should the VEIP contract be cancelled, the State will incur costs for an early termination, 
including “reasonable” reimbursement for contractor costs associated with early 
termination; however, any such costs are not accounted for in this analysis.  
 
In total, 21 State positions (11 with MDE and 10 with MVA) are likely affected by the 
repeal of VEIP. MVA advises MDE incurs about $1.2 million annually in administrative 
costs, while MVA incurs about $3.5 million annually. Under the bill, these positions are 
assumed to no longer be needed, although MVA and MDE may be able to reassign staff to 
other activities, in which case the savings are less than shown above. 
 
Other Potential Impacts 
 
Federal Funding:  As VEIP is part of Maryland’s State Implementation Plan required by 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, repealing VEIP will likely incur federal 
penalties that could result in the withholding of otherwise eligible federal aid dollars. 
However, any such impact cannot be reliably predicted and is not included in this analysis.  
 
Property and Capital Assets:  MVA notes that there may be one-time revenues associated 
with the sale of property and capital assets at the testing stations owned by MVA, and these 
sales will also likely entail significant staff time. Any sale proceeds cannot be quantified 
at this time and are not included in this analysis.  
 
Bond Coverage:  MVA advises that MDOTS’s five-year financial plan fully accounts for 
all available funding to its debt service, operating budget, and capital budget. MDOT must 
maintain a balanced six-year program in accordance with federal guidelines. The loss of 
revenue associated with the repeal of VEIP causes MDOT to fall below its policy limit of 
2.5 times coverage for its net income test. Thus, to maintain the required coverage, MDOT 
would need to (1) increase revenues from another source; (2) decrease operating and/or 
capital expenditures; or (3) a combination of the two. However, any such impact is not 
included in this analysis.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that own vehicles subject to VEIP testing may 
realize cost savings and efficiencies, as vehicles will no longer need to be tested every  
two years.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 183/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 106 (Senator Ready, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5