START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 131 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 131 
(Delegate Moon) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Expungement - Adverse Actions and Removal From 
Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) System 
 
 
This bill clarifies that refusal by a person to disclose information about criminal charges 
that have been expunged (1) may not be the sole reason for a unit, an official, or an 
employee of the State or a political subdivision of the State to deny the person’s application 
for a license, permit, registration, or governmental service and (2) may not be the sole 
reason for an educational institution to expel or refuse to admit the person. The bill also 
prohibits the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system from in any way referring to the 
existence of a case in which possession of cannabis is the only charges in the case and the 
charge was disposed of before July 1, 2023. Finally, the bill requires the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to remove from the MDEC system all 
references to the existence of such cases. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $175,600 in FY 2027 
only for one-time computer programming. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially 
affect State finances or operations, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 131/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Disclosures of Criminal Charges 
 
The following individuals/entities are prohibited from requiring a person to disclose 
expunged information about criminal charges in an application, interview, or other means:  
(1) an employer or educational institution when the person applies for employment or 
admission; and (2) a unit, official, or employee of the State or a political subdivision of the 
State when the person applies for a license, permit, registration, or governmental service. 
A person is not required to refer to or give information concerning an expunged charge 
when answering a question about a criminal charge that did not result in a conviction or a 
conviction that the Governor pardoned. A person’s refusal to disclose information about 
expunged criminal charges may not be the sole reason for an employer to discharge or 
refuse to hire the person or a unit, official, or employee of the State or a political 
subdivision of the State to deny the person’s application. Violators are guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to one year and/or a fine of up to $1,000 
for each violation. A governmental official or employee who is convicted may also be 
removed or dismissed from public service. 
 
References to Cannabis Criminal Records in Case Search and the Central Repository 
 
The Maryland Judiciary Case Search (which is not the same as MDEC), provides public 
Internet access to information from Maryland District Court and circuit court traffic, 
criminal, and civil case records. The information shown includes names of parties, 
addresses, case numbers, dates of birth, trial dates, charges, and case dispositions. Among 
other things, the Maryland Judiciary Case Search is prohibited from referring in any way 
to the existence of records of a charge in a case with electronic records for (1) a charge of 
possession of cannabis that resulted in a conviction that was later pardoned by the Governor 
(effective January 31, 2026), and (2) a criminal case in which possession of cannabis is 
the only charge in the case and the charge was disposed of before July 1, 2023. 
 
On or before July 1, 2024, DPSCS must remove all references in the Criminal Justice 
Information System Central Repository to all cases in which possession of cannabis is the 
only charge in the case and the charge was issued before July 1, 2023. 
 
State Expenditures:  While the bill requires DPSCS to remove information from  
the MDEC system by July 1, 2024, this estimate assumes that the Judiciary is responsible 
for implementation of this requirement since the MDEC system was created and is 
controlled by the Judiciary and is not connected to DPSCS. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 131/ Page 3 
The Judiciary advises that as long as the bill only requires the removal of all references to 
specified cannabis possession cases from public facing case records in MDEC, 
implementation requires only one-time computer programming, at a cost of $175,607 in 
fiscal 2027. 
 
The Judiciary notes that if compliance is required by the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective 
date, additional resources may be required. If compliance requires removal from case notes 
or other cases that refer to the expunged case, the Judiciary lacks the technological ability 
to accomplish such a task, and implementation to that extent would result in an 
unquantifiable but significant fiscal and operational impact. This analysis does not reflect 
implementation costs under these scenarios. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 621 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 315 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Department of Human Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3