START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 100 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 100 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship 
Program - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship 
Program to include a resident of Maryland at the time of the disabling or fatal event who 
is or was eligible for the Chapter 35 Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance 
(DEA) benefit at the time of application as determined by the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs. The bill also authorizes applicants to submit a copy of the applicant’s certificate 
of eligibility DEA benefits to verify eligibility with a postsecondary institution. In cases 
where an applicant is unable to obtain a certificate of eligibility, the bill authorizes a school 
certifying official or institutional liaison to verify the applicant’s DEA status. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the number of additional awards made under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated, to the extent additional individuals receive a Conroy scholarship under 
the bill, general fund expenditures and Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship 
Fund special fund revenues and expenditures may increase by an estimated $4,600 per 
award annually beginning FY 2027, as discussed below. Public institutions of higher 
education may realize operational efficiencies to the extent Chapter 35 DEA certificates 
streamline the verification process. The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) 
can update eligibility requirements using existing resources. This bill may increase the 
cost of an entitlement program beginning in FY 2027. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 100/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
The Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program 
 
The Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program makes awards to 
specified public safety personnel and their eligible dependents to attend an eligible 
postsecondary institution in the State for five years of full-time study or eight years of 
part-time study. The Jean B. Cryor Memorial Scholarship Program makes the same type 
of financial assistance available to the child or surviving spouse of a public or nonpublic 
school employee who, as a result of an act of violence, died in the line of duty or is 
100% disabled due to an injury sustained in the line of duty. There is an Edward T. Conroy 
and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund. Chapter 23 of 2022 mandates at least $4.0 million in 
funding for the Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund beginning in 
fiscal 2024. 
 
Scholarships may be used at private or public four-year institutions, community colleges, 
or private career schools and they may be used for undergraduate or graduate study. Under 
current law, to apply for a Conroy or a Cryor scholarship, the following individuals are 
required to be a resident of Maryland at the time of application or the disabling or fatal 
event: 
 
 
the child or surviving spouse of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who, after  
December 7, 1941, died or suffered a service-connected 100% permanent disability; 
 
the child or surviving spouse of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who was 
declared to be a prisoner of war or missing in action as a result of the 
Vietnam conflict; 
 
an individual who was a prisoner of war as a result of the Vietnam conflict; 
 
a veteran who suffers a service-connected disability of 25% or greater and has 
exhausted all federal veterans’ educational benefits; 
 
the child or surviving spouse of a victim of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks; 
and 
 
the child or surviving spouse of a school employee who, as a result of violence, died 
in the line of duty or suffered a 100% permanent disability in the line of duty. 
 
Individuals who are not required to be a resident of Maryland at the time of application or 
the disabling or fatal events under current law include (1) the child or surviving spouse of 
any State or local public safety officer killed in the line of duty; (2) a disabled public safety 
employee; or (3) the child or surviving spouse of a disabled public safety employee who 
sustains an injury in the line of duty that renders the public safety employee 100% disabled. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 100/ Page 3 
To be eligible, an applicant also must be accepted for admission or enrolled in the regular 
undergraduate, graduate, or professional program at an eligible institution or be enrolled in 
a two-year terminal certificate program in which the course work is acceptable for transfer 
credit for an accredited baccalaureate program. 
 
Postsecondary institutions include public, private nonprofit, and for-profit institutions of 
higher education, as well as private career schools. Prior to Chapter 23, which specified 
the eligibility of private career schools in statute, private career schools were not 
necessarily considered eligible institutions due to other parameters of the scholarship 
programs. Postsecondary institutions verify eligibility and award the scholarships to 
eligible students. In October and February of each year, each postsecondary institution 
reports to MHEC the number of students eligible for a Conroy or a Cryor scholarship. After 
verifying the number of eligible students for both programs, MHEC allocates the funds for 
awards to the postsecondary institutions. If funds cannot be allocated in the fiscal year in 
which awards are made, priority must be given to allocating funds for those awards in the 
following fiscal year. 
 
Awards are subject to both a ceiling and a floor. They may not exceed the equivalent annual 
tuition and mandatory fees of a full-time undergraduate Maryland resident at a 
four-year institution within the University System of Maryland (USM) – other than the 
University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus (UMB) and the University of Maryland Global 
Campus (UMGC) – with the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident 
undergraduate. They may not be less than either $3,000 or the equivalent annual tuition 
and mandatory fees of a resident of the institution attended by the recipient of the 
scholarship, whichever is the least. 
 
Each recipient may hold the award for five years of full-time study or eight years of 
part-time study. No more than 15 eligible recipients of a scholarship may be veterans who 
suffer a service-connected disability of 25% or greater and have exhausted or are no longer 
eligible for federal veterans’ educational benefits. 
 
Chapter 35 Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance 
 
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Survivors’ Chapter 35 DEA Program provides 
financial support for the education and training of the child or spouse of a veteran or service 
member who has died, is captured or missing, or is permanently and totally disabled due 
to a service-connected disability. To qualify, you must be the child or spouse of: 
 
 
a veteran who died or is permanently disabled due to a service-connected disability; 
 
a service member who died in the line of duty; 
 
a service member who is missing in action or was captured in the line of duty for 
more than 90 days; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 100/ Page 4 
 
a service member who was forcibly detained or interned in the line of duty for more 
than 90 days; or 
 
a service member who is in the hospital or getting outpatient treatment for a 
service-connected permanent and total disability who is likely to be discharged. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  In fiscal 2025, 2,046 scholarships were awarded under the  
Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program, representing almost 
$9.5 million in funding. Therefore, each additional award recipient may increase 
expenditures by an estimated $4,600 per award annually beginning fiscal 2027, based on 
current scholarship awards. However, each scholarship award may be up to the tuition and 
mandatory fees of a full-time undergraduate Maryland resident at the four-year public 
institution with the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident undergraduate within 
USM, other than UMB and UMGC. 
 
Chapter 23 mandates at least $4.0 million for the Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor 
Scholarship Fund beginning in fiscal 2024; even so, funding still must be allocated based 
on the number of eligible individuals and can exceed the mandated $4.0 million. The 
fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $7.0 million for the Edward T. Conroy and 
Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund. 
 
Although the requirements for Chapter 35 DEA and Conroy scholarships are very similar, 
expanding eligibility to include individuals eligible for Chapter 35 DEA may increase the 
number of annual award recipients beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
Additionally, there may be individuals who are eligible for a Conroy scholarship under 
current law but are unable to verify eligibility via authorized means under current law. 
Expanding verification procedures to allow individuals to verify eligibility through 
Chapter 35 DEA certificates may therefore also increase the number of annual award 
recipients. These additional awards likely cannot be absorbed by existing appropriations to 
the program as MHEC advises the program is already on track to exceed the currently 
appropriated $7.0 million in funds for fiscal 2026. Further, MHEC anticipates that the 
substantial growth of the program in recent years is likely to continue through fiscal 2031 
due to unmet demand from prior fiscal years and increased awareness of the program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 772 and HB 980 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 273 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 100/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Independent 
College and University Association; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland; University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5