START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 163 
(Delegate Wu, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Student Technology Use Policy - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education to develop and adopt a policy prohibiting 
or limiting the use of personal electronic devices, including smartphones, tablets, laptops, 
smartwatches, or smartglasses, during school hours. The policy must include a prohibition 
for middle and elementary school students and a limitation for high school students on the 
use of a personal electronic device during school hours. The policy may not prohibit a 
student from using a personal electronic device in specified situations. A policy developed 
in accordance with the bill must be published on the website of each local board of 
education and in each public school student handbook. Every two years, the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) must review policies developed in accordance with the 
bill for elementary and middle school students and local boards of education must review 
such policies for high school students. Each local board of education must also establish 
policies and procedures for enforcement, such as appropriate disciplinary measures for 
violations, including in-school suspension. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can review local board policies as specified with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected.    
  
Local Effect:  Local boards of education can develop, adopt, publish and regularly review 
electronic device use policies as specified with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 163/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A personal electronic device policy developed in accordance with the bill 
may not prohibit a student from using a personal electronic device (1) for any purpose 
documented in the student’s individualized education program or section 504 plan;  
(2) to monitor or address a student’s documented health issue; or (3) when directed by an 
educator or administrator for educational purposes. 
 
Current Law:  Most local school systems have policies governing the use of cell phones 
in schools or on school grounds, which are aligned with local codes of discipline. Policies 
vary across school systems and schools and typically cover definitions, guidelines, 
compliance procedures, and consequences for violations. They also generally cover 
procedures for notifying parents and staff, and the responsibilities of school administrators 
and may provide differing levels of flexibility for elementary, middle, and high school 
students. 
 
MSDE and the State Board of Education convened the Task Force on Student Cell Phone 
Use in Schools in spring 2025 to review policies across the State on allowable student use 
of cell phones in schools and develop guidance and recommendations. In August 2025, the 
State Board passed a resolution reinforcing the recommendations from the task force’s 
guidance document and encouraging local school systems to regularly revisit and assess 
their current policy to ensure it satisfies community needs and aligns with task force 
recommendations; and requesting that school systems clearly define expectations for their 
student cell phone use policies.  
 
Additionally, MSDE advises that the agency has partnered with Phones in Focus, a national 
research study that gathers educators’ input on school cell phone policies, with a goal of 
developing evidence-based recommendations for policies that support academic learning, 
social well-being and student focus.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 147 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 79 (Senator Benson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Center for School Safety; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 163/ Page 3 
County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3