START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 140 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 140 
(Delegate Woods) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education and Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners 
- Vacancy Procedures - Alterations 
 
 
This bill establishes procedures for filling vacancies on local boards of education that apply 
statewide, replacing current procedures that vary by local board. For elected members, the 
new, statewide procedures provide for election of a successor at the next general election 
if the vacancy occurs 55 days or more before the candidate filing deadline for the primary 
election in the second year of the vacating member’s term. But if the vacancy occurs later 
than that, or if no one qualifies to be on the ballot, the remaining members select an 
individual to fill the vacancy. For boards with appointed members, a vacancy for an 
appointed member is filled by the method the board uses to appoint members to the board 
and the appointment must occur within 60 days of the vacancy. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill standardizes procedures for filling vacancies on local boards of 
education by establishing a new statewide process and repealing existing local processes 
for filling vacancies. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 140/ Page 2 
Elected Members 
 
Under the bill, if a vacancy occurs 55 days or more before the candidate filing deadline for 
the primary election held in the second year of a vacating elected member’s term, the 
successor must be elected at the next general election, with the election conducted in 
accordance with existing provisions of the Election Law Article governing board of 
education elections, including nomination of candidates at the primary election (if there are 
more than two candidates) and election of a nominee at the general election. 
 
If a vacancy occurs 54 days or less before the candidate filing deadline (or if no candidate 
files a certificate of candidacy for the office or if no individual otherwise qualifies to be on 
the ballot), the remaining members of the county board must select a qualified individual 
to fill the vacancy for the remainder of that term and until a successor is elected and 
qualifies. To select an individual, the remaining members must (1) advertise the vacancy; 
(2) review resumes submitted from candidates for the vacancy; (3) conduct livestreamed 
interviews of all candidates; and (4) hold a public vote to select a candidate to fill the 
vacancy. 
 
Appointed Members 
 
Vacancies for appointed members of local boards must be filled for the remainder of that 
term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies using the method that the local board 
uses to appoint members to the board. Appointments to fill a vacancy in an appointed 
member seat must occur not later than 60 days after the date on which the vacancy occurs. 
 
Current Law:  The Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership shows the 
selection methods, terms of office, and membership of the 24 local boards of education. 
 
Procedures to fill vacancies on local boards of education vary by jurisdiction. In some 
counties, specified officials appoint individuals to vacant elected and appointed member 
seats. In other jurisdictions, vacancies must be filled at subsequent general elections in 
certain situations. Vacant seats are generally filled until successors are appointed or elected 
and qualify, though some vacancies are filled by appointment only until the next regularly 
scheduled election. 
 
Appointing Authority 
 
In some jurisdictions, including Allegany, Anne Arundel, Calvert, Dorchester, Garrett, 
Harford (elected member vacancies only), Kent, St. Mary’s, Washington, Wicomico, and 
Worcester counties, the county council or county commissioners fill vacancies on the local 
board in at least some situations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 140/ Page 3 
In Caroline (elected members only), Charles, and Montgomery counties, the remaining 
members of the local board of education appoint an individual to fill a vacancy on the 
board in at least some situations. 
 
In other counties, the Governor fills vacancies in at least some situations, including in 
Baltimore, Caroline (appointed members only), Carroll, Cecil, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, 
and Talbot counties. 
 
In some counties, the county executive fills vacancies in at least some situations, including 
in Frederick County (with confirmation by the county council), Harford County (with the 
advice and consent of the county council and for appointed member vacancies only), 
Howard (subject to confirmation of the county council), and Prince George’s County 
(where the county council has the opportunity to disapprove an appointment). In 
Baltimore City, the mayor must fill vacancies in both elected and appointed member seats. 
 
In some jurisdictions, the authority of the above entities to fill vacancies is limited by 
requirements that school board nominating commissions generate a list of names for 
consideration. Baltimore City and Baltimore, Washington, and Wicomico counties all use 
some form of nominating commission as part of the process to fill vacancies in board 
membership (Baltimore City and Baltimore County also appoint regular members to the 
board of education using a nominating commission process). 
 
Procedures for Filling Vacancies by Appointment 
 
Current law does not uniformly specify procedures for soliciting, interviewing, or selecting 
candidates to fill vacancies on local boards of education, though for some jurisdictions 
there are limitations or procedures set out in statute, such as the school board nominating 
commission processes described above. For some counties, statute requires that interviews 
of candidates to fill a vacancy occur at public meetings. In Howard County, the county 
executive must endeavor to ensure that the county board reflects the race, gender, and 
ethnic diversity of the population of the county when filling vacancies. 
 
Elections to Fill Vacancies 
 
In addition to the above appointment mechanisms to fill vacancies, for some counties, 
procedures are outlined in statute for filling board member vacancies at the subsequent 
general election following the vacancy in certain scenarios. Even in situations where an 
appointing authority fills a vacancy initially (described above), in some counties members 
appointed to fill vacancies only serve until the subsequent election, when a new member is 
elected to complete the vacated term. There are time frames relating to when the vacancy 
occurs, that determine whether a vacancy must be filled at the subsequent general election. 
Provisions governing Allegany, Frederick, Howard, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Talbot, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 140/ Page 4 
Wicomico counties’ boards all have requirements for elections to fill vacancies on local 
boards of education in some situations (either to fill the initial vacancy or to fill the vacancy 
at the next election following an initial appointment to fill a vacancy). 
 
Timing of Appointments and Elections to Fill Vacancies 
 
Current law imposes various time limitations on appointments to fill a vacancy and requires 
that elections be used to fill vacancies occurring in certain time frames, though the exact 
timing required varies by jurisdiction. 
 
For example, in Allegany County, vacancies filled by appointment generally serve until a 
successor is elected and qualifies, but appointments to fill a vacancy must only serve until 
the subsequent general election if the vacancy occurs before the date that is 10 days prior 
to the filing deadline for the primary election held in the second year of the voting 
member’s term. In Anne Arundel County, the county council must fill a vacancy due to 
lack of a candidate in an election within 30 days of the general election. In Charles County, 
remaining members have 90 days to fill a vacancy on the board and the board may choose 
to not fill a seat that becomes vacant in an election year. The mayor must fill vacancies 
within 60 days in Baltimore City. In Baltimore County, the Governor must act within 
30 days to make any appointment to the county board. In Frederick County, vacancies must 
be filled by appointment when they occur 30 days or less before the candidate registration 
deadline for the next primary election. Otherwise, when there are more than 30 days before 
the candidate registration deadline for the next primary election, the county executive must 
still make an appointment to temporarily fill the vacancy, but that individual must serve 
only until a qualified individual is elected at the next general election.  
Washington County’s nominating commission must submit names to the county 
commissioners within 30 days of the vacancy occurring and the county commissioners 
must select an individual within 15 days of receiving the names. In Wicomico County, 
members appointed to fill a vacancy serve only until a successor is elected at the next 
general election if the vacancy occurs before the date that is 30 days before the filing 
deadline for the presidential primary election. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Anne Arundel County 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 140/ Page 5 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 140/ Page 6 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. All 24 boards have either student members 
or student representatives who regularly present at board meetings; however, only 8 boards 
allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority to vote on matters 
relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with voting student 
members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to operating and 
capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership 
of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2026 
 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Anne Arundel 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore City 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed by Governor from county at large 
7 elected from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed by Governor from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 140/ Page 7 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Harford 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed by County Executive from 
county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (1-year term) 
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Kent 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Prince George’s 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Somerset2 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 140/ Page 8 
School System 
Number 
of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Washington3 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Wicomico4 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
4 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed and elected board:  (1) in Baltimore County, members are 
appointed by the Governor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission; (2) in Caroline County, members are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate; (3) in Baltimore City, members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names 
provided by the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel; and (4) in Harford County, 
members are appointed by the county executive with the advice and consent of the county council. 
2 Although not in statute, the Somerset County Board of Education reports that there are three nonvoting 
student representatives who give presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the 
three regular high schools in the county. 
3Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
4 Chapter 429 of 2025 codified at least one nonvoting student member on the Wicomico County Board of 
Education. The Wicomico County Board of Education includes four student representatives who give 
presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the four high schools in the county. 
At each meeting, one of the four student representatives sits with the regular board members on the dais for 
the full meeting, while other student board members come forward to speak as needed. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8