START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 186 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 186 
(Delegate Bouchat, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Natural Resources - Bow Hunting - Sundays 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources to allow, statewide, a person to 
hunt (1) deer on Sundays throughout the deer bow hunting season and (2) turkey using a 
bow and arrow on Sundays throughout the turkey hunting season. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited in the 
State, with specified exceptions. For an overview of Sunday hunting laws in the State, 
please see the Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Authorizing additional hunting in the State may have a meaningful 
economic impact on certain types of businesses. The 2011 National Survey of Fishing, 
Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation conducted by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service (FWS) indicated that the average hunter in the State spent $49 per hunting day on 
trip-related expenditures (food and lodging, transportation, and other trip costs) in 2011, 
and hunters in the State spent $50.2 million total on trip-related expenditures and  
$264 million on hunting overall in 2011 (including trip-related, equipment, and any other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 186/ Page 2 
expenditures). While FWS’s more recent surveys, in 2016 and 2022, have not included 
state-specific spending/cost information, if it is assumed that hunting spending/costs in 
Maryland increased by a similar or greater amount between 2011 and 2022 compared to 
the increase in national spending/costs during that period, hunters spent at least 
$67 per hunting day on trip-related expenditures in 2022. 
 
In addition to businesses directly affected by hunting, to the extent the bill results in a 
decrease in the deer population, the bill may also affect several other types of businesses, 
such as farms (due to a reduction in crop damage) and businesses that own or repair 
vehicles (due to a reduction in deer-vehicle collisions). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 186/ Page 3 
Appendix – Sunday Hunting in Maryland 
 
 
Sunday Hunting, Generally 
 
Hunting game birds or mammals on Sundays is generally prohibited, with specified 
exceptions. Chapter 95 of 2020 reorganized and clarified statutory provisions related to 
Sunday hunting in the State. Chapter 95 also (1) explicitly stated that a person may not 
hunt on public lands within the State park system on a Sunday and (2) authorized the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to set all of the seasons for Sunday hunting. 
 
Game Birds and Mammals on Private Property and Public Land 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Allegany, Cecil, Garrett, St. Mary’s, and Washington counties during the open 
season for these animals on private property and public land designated for Sunday hunting 
by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting in Frederick County from the first Sunday in October 
through the second Sunday in January of the following year on private property and public 
land designated for Sunday hunting by DNR. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Dorchester County during the open season for these animals on private property. 
DNR also may allow Sunday turkey hunting in Dorchester County during the spring turkey 
hunting season on public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting 
may only occur from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time 
restriction does not apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from the 
first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive, or (2) on each 
Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Calvert, Caroline, Charles, and Queen Anne’s counties during the open season for 
these animals on private property. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season; (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season; and (3) on 
each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 186/ Page 4 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Somerset County during the open season for these animals on private property and 
public land leased to a hunt club. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur from 
30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not apply 
(1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in October 
and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Wicomico County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays 
in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
DNR may allow Sunday hunting for any game bird or mammal, except migratory game 
birds, in Worcester County during the open season for these animals on private property 
and public land designated for hunting by DNR. In general, Sunday hunting may only occur 
from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. However, the time restriction does not 
apply (1) on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) on the last three Sundays in 
October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer bow hunting season. 
 
Deer on Private Property 
 
All Seasons:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in 
Carroll County in all deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the 
second Sunday in January of the following year; (2) in Kent County on each Sunday in all 
deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer 
firearms season as designated by DNR, and on each Sunday during the deer bow hunting 
season and the deer muzzle loader season); (3) in Montgomery County on each Sunday in 
all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time 
restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior deer hunt, and on one Sunday in the 
deer firearms season and the deer bow hunting season as designated by DNR); and (4) in 
Talbot County on each Sunday in all deer hunting seasons from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. (however, the time restriction does not apply to a participant in the junior 
deer hunt, on one Sunday in the deer firearms season as designated by DNR, and on the 
last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in November during the deer 
bow hunting season). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 186/ Page 5 
Firearms Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on each Sunday of the deer firearms season and (2) in Anne Arundel 
County on the first Sunday of the deer firearms season. 
 
Bow Season:  DNR may allow Sunday deer hunting on private property (1) in  
Harford County on the last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in 
November of the deer bow season and (2) in Anne Arundel County on the first Sunday in 
November of the deer bow season. 
 
Turkey on Private Property 
 
DNR may allow Sunday turkey hunting on private property on Sundays during the spring 
turkey hunting season in Carroll and Kent counties and from 30 minutes before sunrise 
until 10:30 a.m. in Talbot County. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Junior Hunt:  DNR may allow a person who is age 16 or younger and is participating in a 
junior hunt to hunt on a Sunday. 
 
Traditional Sunday Hunting:  DNR may allow the following persons to hunt game birds 
and mammals on a Sunday:  (1) a person using State-certified raptors to hunt game birds 
or mammals during open season for these animals; (2) an unarmed person participating in 
an organized fox chase; and (3) a person using a regulated shooting ground to hunt 
pen-reared game birds or tower-released flighted mallard ducks. 
 
Deer Management Permit Holders:  DNR may allow a person with a deer management 
permit to shoot deer on any Sunday throughout the year in accordance with the terms of 
the permit. 
 
Express Prohibitions 
 
In general, a person may not hunt on a Sunday in Baltimore City or Baltimore, Howard, or  
Prince George’s counties. This prohibition in these counties does not apply to the 
above-described acts of traditional Sunday hunting. In addition, a person with a deer 
management permit may shoot deer under the permit on a Sunday in these counties. 
Further, a person may not hunt migratory game birds on a Sunday, and a person may not 
hunt on public land within the State park system on a Sunday. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 186/ Page 6 
Background on Deer Hunting in Maryland 
 
Because white-tailed deer thrive in habitat that is composed of woods and openings and 
because hunter access in those areas is limited, suburban development has provided 
excellent deer habitat in the State. This has resulted in growing deer populations in 
suburban areas. Higher populations of deer can lead to a greater number of negative 
interactions with suburban residents, such as deer-vehicle collisions and vegetation 
damage. Deer also cause agricultural damage. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6