START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 200 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Sale of Residential Real Property - Required Flood Risk Disclosure 
 
 
This bill requires, beginning July 1, 2027, a seller of real property to provide specified 
information to the purchaser related to flood risks prior to entering into a contract. By  
June 1, 2027, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must develop and 
publish a real property flood risk disclosure statement form for use in connection with the 
bill’s requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can handle the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) elevation 
certificate” means the certificate issued by FEMA that certifies official elevation and 
building data for a property located within a special flood hazard area in order to inform 
flood insurance premiums.  
 
MDE must develop, publish, and maintain a real property flood risk disclosure statement 
form that, at minimum, includes the following information: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 200/ Page 2 
 
whether the property is located wholly or partially within a special or moderate-risk 
flood hazard area (as defined in the bill);  
 
whether the seller has knowledge of any past occurrence where an owner received 
specified federal disaster assistance; 
 
whether the property is subject to federal requirements for the owner to maintain 
flood insurance;  
 
whether the vendor currently has flood insurance and the availability of a FEMA 
elevation certificate;  
 
whether the vendor has knowledge of any claims filed for flood damage, including 
with the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
 
whether the vendor has knowledge of any flood damage, water seepage, or pooled 
water resulting from natural events such as heavy rainfall, coastal storm surges, tidal 
inundation, or river overflows. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, prior to entering into a contract of sale, a seller of real property 
must provide a completed flood risk disclosure form to the purchaser. In addition to the 
form, the seller must also provide, if applicable, (1) a copy of the FEMA elevation 
certificate; (2) an accounting of any money received from claims filed for flood damage to 
the property; and (3) the number of times flooding events have occurred on the property. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976  
 
Pursuant to the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976, MDE is responsible for various 
initiatives designed to address flood hazards, including (1) assisting in the development of 
guidance to minimize the impacts of flooding; (2) providing State guidelines and technical 
assistance to local governments to manage flood areas; and (3) administering the 
Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program. For the purposes of State law 
regarding flood control and watershed management, “subdivision” is defined as any 
county, including Baltimore City, and any incorporated municipality that has the authority 
to adopt and enforce land use and control measures for the areas within its jurisdiction.  
 
MDE and subdivisions must coordinate flood management activities with all related 
programs, including the National Flood Insurance Program, the Sediment Control 
Program, and the State water pollution control and abatement programs. 
 
Real Property Contact Disclosures – Requirements  
 
Statutory provisions set forth numerous requirements regarding statements, disclosures, 
and notices in contracts for the sale of property, including provisions relating to:  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 200/ Page 3 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges; 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays; 
 
notice of specified development impact fees; 
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund; 
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence.  
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located. Generally, 
unless otherwise specifically provided, a contract of sale is not rendered invalid by the 
omission of any statement, disclosure, or notice.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3