START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 203 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 203 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor and Employment - Training Repayment Agreements - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits an employer from requiring, as a condition of employment, employees 
or prospective employees to enter into a training repayment agreement. An agreement that 
constitutes a training repayment is null and void as being against the public policy of the 
State. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may investigate violations upon receipt of 
a written complaint by an employee. If an employer knowingly violates the provisions, the 
Commissioner must assess a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a first violation and $20,000 
for subsequent violations. An individual may also bring a civil action for economic 
damages and, if successful, is entitled to restitution and potentially an additional award up 
to three times the amount of the restitution. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $94,100 in FY 2027 for staffing. 
Out year costs reflect annualization, inflation, and termination of a contractual position. 
The bill’s penalty provisions are not expected to materially increase general fund revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
94,100 
53,700 
56,200 
58,600 
61,000 
Net Effect 
($94,100) 
($53,700) 
($56,200) 
($58,600) 
($61,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 203/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Training repayment agreement” means an agreement that requires an 
employee to pay an employer or a third party, such as a training provider, a sum of money 
if the employee voluntarily or involuntarily leaves employment. This includes 
requirements to reimburse the employer or third party for training previously provided. The 
definition does not include a cash advance to an employee, an educational sabbatical leave 
contract, or an agreement entered into as part of a collective bargaining employment. 
 
Penalties assessed by the commissioner are subject to the notice and hearing requirements 
of the Administrative Procedures Act. A penalty or restitution order remains in effect 
against any successor business, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Current law does not address the use of training repayment agreements in 
labor contracts, but it does restrict, to a limited extent, the use of noncompete or conflict of 
interest provisions in labor contracts. 
 
Specifically, a noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment contract that 
restricts the ability of an employee to enter into employment with a new employer or to 
become self-employed in the same or similar business is null and void as being against 
public policy of the State if it applies to (1) any employee who earns 150% or less of the 
State minimum wage; (2) a licensed health care provider who provides direct patient care 
and earns $350,000 or less in total annual compensation; or (3) a licensed veterinary 
practitioner or technician. This provision does not apply to an employment contract or a 
similar document or agreement with respect to the taking or use of a client or patient list or 
other proprietary client-related or patient-related information. 
 
For licensed health care professionals providing direct patient care and earning more than 
$350,000 annually, a noncompete provision may not exceed one year from the last day of 
employment. In addition, the geographical restriction in a noncompete or conflict of 
interest provision in an applicable employment contract may not exceed 10 miles from the 
primary place of employment. Upon request of a patient, an employer must provide the 
new location where a former employee is practicing. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $94,069 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring a half-time wage and hour investigator to investigate complaints and a contractual 
half-time Assistant Attorney General for the first year to develop enforcement policies and 
procedures. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 203/ Page 3 
Regular Position 
0.5 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Regular Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$34,833 
Contractual Salary and Benefits 
38,132 
Operating Expenses 
  21,104 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$94,069 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of the 
contractual position after the first year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses are no longer permitted to require training 
repayment agreements as a condition of employment and may face civil liability and 
penalties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3