START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 204 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 204 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Drinking Water - Regulation - Control and Prevention of Waterborne Disease 
 
 
This bill sets requirements for certain building owners and water suppliers, including 
(1) mandatory minimum detectable disinfectant residual levels in public water systems and 
related testing and (2) notice of water distribution system disruptions. Among other 
requirements, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must (1) conduct 
investigations of violations of minimum detectable disinfectant residual standards; 
(2) establish a public database of water distribution system disruptions; and (3) sample and 
test public water systems upon notice of a diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease. The 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must (1) develop standards and conduct testing 
and investigations of Legionnaires’ disease cases and establish a registry of related case 
data, and (2) develop a public awareness campaign and targeted consumer education 
program. The bill establishes regulation and reporting requirements for MDE and MDH.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.9 million in FY 2027; future years 
are annualized and reflect ongoing costs and inflation. State expenditures (all/multiple 
funds) increase by an additional indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027, as discussed 
below. The application of existing penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1,919,600 
1,784,200 
1,844,800 
1,906,100 
1,967,500 
All/Mult. Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 204/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
FY 2027, for at least some jurisdictions. Local revenues are not directly affected. This bill 
imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a definition for “disruption in the water distribution 
system” that applies under a new Part III, Control and Prevention of Waterborne Disease, 
under Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Environment Article. The term means any disruption to 
normal water transmission within a public water system and includes (1) a change in the 
water treatment process, including temporary changes from the use of chlorine to the use 
of chloramine (or vice versa); (2) any planned or unplanned event that reduces water 
delivery pressure below 20 pounds per square inch; (3) a lead service line replacement; 
(4) a new construction tie-in; (5) a source water change; (6) water treatment plant 
maintenance or changes; (7) changes in directional water flow; (8) flooding; (9) the 
replacement of valves, hydrants, or meters; (10) pumping failures; (11) pipeline or water 
main breaks; (12) system repairs; or (13) emergency conditions.  
 
Required Levels of Detectable Residual Disinfectant – Implementation and Enforcement 
 
Requirements for Water Suppliers:  Notwithstanding current law requirements that prohibit 
State primary drinking water regulations from being more stringent than specified national 
primary drinking water regulations or from requiring the addition of any substance for 
preventive health care purposes unrelated to the contamination of drinking water, by 
January 1, 2026, a water supplier must maintain – in all active parts of the public water 
system – a detectable disinfectant residual level of at least 0.5 milligrams per liter (mg/L) 
of free chlorine or 1.0 mg/L of monochloramine. Additionally, a water supplier must, at 
frequent and regular intervals, conduct disinfectant residual testing to determine the 
amount and type of detectable disinfectant residual at different points in the public water 
system. 
 
Related Regulations:  By October 1, 2027, MDE, in consultation with MDH, must adopt 
regulations to (1) require nitrification plans for public water systems that use 
monochloramine and (2) establish monitoring requirements for public water systems 
during construction activities that may affect the public water system. 
 
MDE is also authorized to adopt regulations, in consultation with MDH, that (1) increase 
minimum detectable disinfectant residual level requirements for public water systems, or 
(2) establish additional disinfectant or testing requirements for public water systems to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 204/ Page 3 
minimize the growth and transmission of Legionella bacteria. MDE is prohibited from 
reducing the required minimum detectable disinfectant residual level requirements 
established under the bill. 
 
Investigation of Violations:  If a water supplier violates the bill’s minimum detectable 
disinfectant residual standards, MDE must investigate the violation. MDE may delegate 
investigative responsibilities to a third‑party. MDE must develop procedures and 
guidelines regarding such investigations that meet minimum standards, as specified. 
Among other things, the procedures and guidelines must include the development of a 
notice to inform the persons served by a water supplier if the water supplier fails to maintain 
the minimum detectable disinfectant residual levels required under the bill. 
 
Water Distribution System Disruptions – Notice Requirements and Public Database of 
Records  
 
Notice Requirements:  A water supplier must provide timely written notice of any 
disruption in the water distribution system that could result in increased levels of 
Legionella bacteria to its customers located in the area affected by the disruption. The 
notice must meet requirements established in regulation by MDE and include specified 
minimum information, such as (1) the estimated length of time that Legionella bacteria 
may remain elevated and (2) information on the possible sources of Legionella bacteria in 
the public water system and measures consumers can take to reduce or eliminate Legionella 
bacteria exposure. 
 
A water supplier must also provide written notice to MDE about water distribution system 
disruptions as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours after the occurrence of a 
disruption. MDE must establish on its website a publicly accessible database of the records 
of water distribution system disruptions received by the department. 
 
Required Regulations:  By January 1, 2027, MDE must adopt regulations, in consultation 
with MDH, that specify the form and manner of the required notices of water distribution 
system disruptions and the specific information that must be included in the notices. MDE 
must publish the regulations on its website. 
 
Investigations, Testing, and Publication of Public Health Information Related to 
Diagnosed Cases of Legionnaires’ Disease 
 
Legionnaires’ Disease Case Investigations:  For each reported diagnosis of Legionnaires’ 
disease, MDH must (1) conduct a comprehensive investigation of the reported case; 
(2) advise the diagnosed individual about the availability of related MDH testing; and 
(3) with the consent of the diagnosed individual, sample and test fixtures and water‑using 
equipment at the “water exposure points” (a location where an individual diagnosed with 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 204/ Page 4 
Legionnaires’ disease resided, was employed, or frequently visited within the 14 days 
immediately preceding the individual’s diagnosis) for the presence of Legionella bacteria. 
Each test must be conducted by a certified laboratory. MDH must develop procedures and 
guidelines regarding the investigation of each reported diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease 
that meet minimum standards, as specified. MDH may delegate testing and investigation 
responsibilities to local health departments (LHDs), as specified. 
 
Public Registry of Legionnaires’ Disease Cases:  MDH must establish on its website a 
publicly accessible registry of de‑identified data regarding reported cases of 
Legionnaires’ disease. MDH must make every effort to include location‑specific 
information regarding Legionnaires’ disease cases to the nearest city block or general 
neighborhood description. 
 
Required Notice and Testing:  MDH must immediately notify MDE of any reported 
diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease, including the addresses where the individual resided, 
frequently visited, or was employed in the month immediately preceding the diagnosis. 
Upon receipt of such a notice, MDE must sample and test the public water system for the 
presence of Legionella bacteria at all locations identified in the notice. Testing must be 
done by a certified laboratory and in accordance with MDE sampling and testing methods, 
as specified. If Legionella bacteria are detected, MDE must conduct (or require the water 
supplier to conduct) further testing to confirm the presence of the bacteria in any source 
that MDE determines is necessary. 
 
Water Management Program for Covered Building Owners  
 
“Covered building” means a building that meets the criteria set forth in the American 
Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) 
Standard 188‑2018. By October 1, 2027, the owner or operator of a covered building must 
implement a water management program to minimize the growth and transmission of 
Legionella bacteria in the building’s water system, consistent with ASHRAE 
Standard 188‑2018. The water management program must be available upon request to 
employees of MDE, MDH, or any other State or local department with licensing or 
inspection authority for the building. MDE, MDH, and other State or local departments 
with licensing or inspection authority are authorized to enforce these requirements. 
 
Public Awareness Campaign and Targeted Consumer Education Program 
 
By January 1, 2027, MDH must develop a public awareness campaign and targeted 
consumer education program to educate consumers, especially vulnerable populations, 
about Legionella bacteria and related protection measures and the bill’s notification 
requirements. The bill establishes minimum information that must be included in the public 
awareness campaign and education program. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 204/ Page 5 
Reporting Requirements  
 
By October 1, 2027 and annually thereafter, MDE, in conjunction with MDH, must report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly on (1) the number of reported cases of 
Legionnaires’ disease in the State in each of the previous 10 years; (2) the number and type 
of violations of the new control and prevention of waterborne disease provisions 
established under the bill for which penalties were assessed; and (3) legislative 
recommendations to further control Legionella bacteria and other waterborne pathogens, 
as specified. 
 
Penalties for Violations 
 
Existing civil and administrative penalty provisions apply to violations of the bill. Any 
penalties collected pursuant to the bill must be distributed to a special fund in MDH and 
used only to support the development of a public awareness campaign and targeted 
consumer education program to educate consumers on Legionella bacteria.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and State Implementation 
 
MDE is responsible for the primary enforcement (primacy) of the federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) in Maryland. This means MDE is charged with ensuring that water 
quality and quantity at all public water systems meet the needs of the public and comply 
with federal and State regulations. According to MDE’s Safe Drinking Water Act 
Annual Compliance Report for Calendar Year 2024 to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), routine compliance activities include regular on-site inspections of water 
systems to identify any sanitary defects, technical assistance, and a permitting process that 
helps ensure that systems obtain the best possible source of water. Maryland regulates 
3,218 public water systems (460 community water systems, 541 nontransient 
noncommunity water systems, and 2,217 transient noncommunity water systems). 
 
SDWA includes the Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts Rules (DBPR), which were 
introduced to reduce drinking water exposure to disinfection byproducts that can cause 
health risks. The maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL) under DBPR for chlorine 
and chloramines (both types of chemical disinfectants) is 4.0 mg/L, and compliance is 
based on a running annual average that is calculated quarterly. Residual disinfectant levels 
cannot exceed the MRDL. If levels must be exceeded temporarily to address microbial 
contamination issues (for distribution line breaks, source water contamination, or 
cross‑connections), the super-chlorinated water is considered “non-potable” and must be 
flushed until the residual is an acceptable level. MDE notes that the current industry 
standard for free chlorine residual is 0.2 mg/L. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 204/ Page 6 
Routine Monitoring and Sampling 
 
Public water systems are required to sample and monitor for a variety of contaminants on 
a routine basis depending on the population served, source type, and historical monitoring 
data of the water system. Generally, the larger the population served by a water system, the 
more frequent the monitoring and reporting requirements. Violations can occur (1) when 
contaminants are found at levels exceeding the federally established maximum 
contaminant level; (2) for failure to monitor and/or report as required; (3) for failure to use 
required treatment techniques; or (4) for failure to notify the public under certain 
circumstances. 
 
Notice Requirements for Drinking Water Violations, Generally  
 
A water supplier must give notice to MDE and people served by the water system and give 
written notice to noncollegiate educational institutions, public schools, family child care 
homes, and child care centers when the water system (1) fails to comply with an applicable 
maximum contaminant level, treatment technique requirement, or testing procedure 
prescribed by a drinking water regulation or fails to perform required monitoring; (2) is 
subject to a variance granted for an inability to meet a maximum contaminant level or an 
exemption; (3) fails to comply with the requirements set by a variance or exemption; or 
(4) has concentration levels of an unregulated contaminant for which the State may require 
notice due to the risk of public health. 
 
MDE is also in the process of promulgating related regulations to establish guidelines and 
requirements for public water systems when there are outages, flooded wells, and flooded 
springs. Among other things, the regulations and an anticipated guidance manual will 
(1) provide instructions to water systems on when and how to issue and lift a boil water 
advisory in response to an outage or flooded well or spring; (2) update public notice 
standards for when an outage or flooded well or spring occurs; (3) establish related 
disinfection procedures and standards; and (4) establish related water quality sampling 
standards that will dictate when a boil water advisory may be lifted. 
 
Applicable Penalties 
 
Various penalties apply to violations of Maryland’s drinking water laws. In addition to any 
other remedies available, there is a graduated system for assessing administrative penalties 
for violations of drinking water provisions for public water systems. The maximum 
administrative penalty that may be imposed is based on the population of the area being 
served by the water supplier. 
 
A water supplier serving a population of more than 10,000 is subject to a penalty of up to 
$1,000 per day not exceeding $25,000 total for each violation. A water supplier serving a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 204/ Page 7 
population of 3,301 to 10,000 is subject to a penalty of up to $500 per day not exceeding 
$12,500 total for each violation. A water supplier serving a population of 501 to 3,300 is 
subject to a penalty of up to $250 per day not exceeding $6,250 total for each violation. 
The penalty that may be imposed on a water supplier serving a population of 500 or less is 
up to $100 per day not exceeding $5,000 total for each violation. MDE must assess a 
penalty only after considering nine criteria, such as the willfulness of the violation, the 
actual harm to the environment or human health, and the extent to which the current 
violation is a part of a recurrent pattern committed by the violator. 
 
In addition, a water supplier who willfully violates specified provisions of Title 9, 
Subtitle 4 of the Environment Article (including failing to comply with the bill’s 
provisions) is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for each day on which the violation 
exists. 
 
All penalties collected under Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Environment Article, which governs 
drinking water, are paid into the Maryland Clean Water Fund. 
 
Legionella Bacteria 
 
State statute is silent regarding Legionnaires’ disease and the Legionella bacteria. Further, 
EPA does not directly regulate Legionnaires’ disease under the National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations, but EPA believes that if Giardia and viruses are removed/inactivated 
according to treatment techniques in the Surface Water Treatment Rule (SWTR), 
Legionella will also be controlled. SWTR requires water systems to filter and disinfect 
surface water sources and establishes treatment techniques and rules designed to minimize 
health risks from disinfection byproducts.  
 
However, EPA is currently examining opportunities to enhance protection against 
Legionella bacteria through revisions to the Microbial and Disinfection Byproduct Rules 
(MDBP) and is evaluating information on unregulated disinfection byproducts, including 
chlorate and nitrosamines. EPA anticipates proposing MDBP rule revisions in 
summer 2027.  
 
MDH regulations (COMAR 10.06.01.03) establish mandatory reporting for any cases of 
legionellosis (a respiratory disease caused by the Legionella pneumophila bacterium). 
Health care providers and laboratories must report any cases immediately. MDH and LHDs 
currently investigate all reported cases. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
MDE general fund expenditures increase by $613,960 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 204/ Page 8 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
nine full-time employees (five administrative specialists, three natural resource planners, 
and one regulatory compliance engineer) to (1) collect and track disinfectant residual 
testing results from water suppliers; (2) develop and adopt regulations, including 
regulations establishing requirements for nitrification plans, water monitoring for public 
water systems, and notification requirements for water distribution system disruptions; 
(3) develop procedures and guidelines to investigate violations of minimum detectable 
disinfectant residual requirements and conduct investigations; (4) establish and maintain a 
publicly accessible database with records of water distribution system disruptions; 
(5) fulfill reporting requirements; and (6) conduct enforcement actions. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including 
annual training for staff. The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate 
are stated below:   
 
 
the bill’s requirements for water suppliers affect approximately 3,200 public water 
systems; 
 
MDE must increase coordination with MDH and LHDs to investigate 
Legionnaires’ disease cases, conduct environmental investigations, track violations, 
and oversee corrective actions; and  
 
as the bill’s requirements are not mandated by federal requirements, general funds 
are needed.  
 
Positions 
9 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$518,958 
Operating Expenses 
    95,002 
FY 2027 MDE Expenditures 
$613,960 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MDE notes that funding for delegation agreements with LHDs is likely also needed. Thus, 
general fund expenditures may increase further. However, MDE did not provide a specific 
estimate of these increased costs. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH general fund expenditures increase by $1,305,594 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
five full‑time employees (one public health laboratory specialist, one environmental 
sanitarian, one administrative specialist, one epidemiologist, and one community health 
educator) to (1) develop and coordinate procedures for guidelines for investigating 
reported cases of Legionnaires’ disease; (2) coordinate program efforts and share required 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 204/ Page 9 
data between MDH and MDE and assist with regulation development; (3) develop, 
implement, 
and 
maintain 
the 
publicly 
accessible 
registry 
of 
de‑identified 
Legionnaires’ disease case data on its website; (4) develop and implement the public 
awareness campaign and targeted consumer education program; and (5) fulfill reporting 
requirements. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including costs 
to develop and disseminate the public awareness campaign and targeted consumer 
education program), and ongoing operating expenses (including laboratory supplies, 
equipment, and specialized software). The information and assumptions used in calculating 
the estimate are stated below:   
 
 
there are approximately 200 cases of Legionnaires’ disease annually in the State and 
the bill significantly increases MDH’s environmental testing responsibilities for 
these cases; 
 
even if MDH delegates certain responsibilities to LHDs, existing MDH staff do not 
have the capacity to handle the increased workload under the bill; 
 
testing for Legionella bacteria must be conducted by specialized laboratories, and 
given the relatively high cost of commercial testing (approximately $400 per 
sample) and the investigatory nature of the required testing under the bill, MDH’s 
Division of Environmental Sciences conducts most of the additional testing (an 
estimated 3,250 tests annually) in‑house; and 
 
costs for the public awareness campaign and targeted consumer education program 
are based on past costs to conduct vaccine outreach and awareness to the public.  
 
Positions 
5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$367,202 
Laboratory Software 
45,938 
Laboratory Supplies and Equipment 
321,750 
Public Outreach and Education Materials 
505,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       65,705 
FY 2027 MDH Expenditures 
$1,305,594 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Under the bill, existing penalty provisions apply for violations. Any penalties collected 
must be distributed to a special fund in MDH and used only to support the development of 
MDH’s public awareness campaign and targeted consumer education program. The 
application of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially affect special fund 
revenues. However, to the extent sufficient penalty revenue is available to offset a portion 
of MDH’s costs to develop the public awareness campaign and consumer education 
program, the need for general funds decreases. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 204/ Page 10 
Effect on the State, Local Governments, and Small Businesses as Water Suppliers and 
Owners/Operators of Covered Buildings  
 
Impacts on Water Suppliers:  The bill establishes a number of new requirements for water 
suppliers in the State, including the requirement to immediately maintain specified 
minimum detectable disinfectant residual levels of free chlorine or monochloramine in all 
active parts of a public water system, conduct disinfectant residual testing at frequent and 
regular intervals, provide additional notice to public water system users and MDE of 
disruptions in the water distribution system, and potentially conduct additional water 
system testing in response to diagnosed cases of Legionnaires’ disease. These requirements 
result in increased expenditures for most water suppliers beginning in fiscal 2027. The 
impact on some water suppliers is significant. 
 
Water suppliers in the State include State agencies, local governments, and small 
businesses, including mobile home parks, private schools, campgrounds, mini‑marts, golf 
courses, and gas stations. 
 
Other than costs for the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC), which are 
discussed separately below, the costs to comply with the detectable disinfectant residual 
level requirements are likely most significant for water supply systems that currently do 
not use chemical disinfectants (such as UV treatment) or that use a non-chlorine or 
chloramine chemical disinfectant. According to MDE, there are approximately 198 water 
systems in the State that need to install a new disinfection treatment to meet the bill’s 
requirements. MDE also advises that while many systems meet current goals, mandating a 
0.5 mg/L residual amount through the entire distribution system creates operational and 
fiscal challenges. Water suppliers may incur substantial capital costs for infrastructure 
improvements, such as looping distribution lines, replacing oversized mains, and installing 
storage tank mixers, and may need to hire additional staff or increase operator hours to 
manage the required testing and “spot-flushing.”  
 
MDE, along with several respondents from a limited survey of State and local government 
agencies, 
including 
the 
Maryland 
Environmental 
Service, 
WSSC, 
and 
the 
Maryland Association of County Health Officers, also note that maintaining the required 
detectable disinfectant residual levels under the bill will put many systems into regulatory 
conflict with federal DBPR MRDL limits. MDE notes that meeting both the new State and 
federal MRDL limits for chlorine and chloramine will be a particular challenge for medium 
and large systems and those using surface water or located on the Eastern Shore of 
Maryland. 
 
WSSC advises that its water system is unable to reliably meet the bill’s 0.5 mg/L 
free chlorine disinfectant residual level requirement without risk of DBPR noncompliance 
and that large-scale water treatment enhancements will be needed to maintain compliance 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 204/ Page 11 
with both the new State and federal standards. WSSC anticipates that it needs to replace 
filter media at the Potomac Water Filtration Plant in the near term to increase treatment for 
disinfection byproduct control before implementing larger scale equipment replacement to 
permanently enhance disinfection byproduct removal. WSSC estimates immediate costs of 
nearly $50.0 million in fiscal 2027, escalating to $136.0 million by fiscal 2031, for system 
equipment replacement. These costs are borne by WSSC customers in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. 
 
Most local governments and State agencies that own or operate public water systems that 
responded to requests for information regarding the fiscal effects of the bill indicated that 
they anticipate additional costs and that they may need to hire staff to meet the bill’s 
requirements. Other than costs for WSSC, estimated annual costs to implement the bill 
range from $50,000 to millions of dollars annually (for the University System of 
Maryland). Costs vary depending on the size of a water system and the type of disinfection 
treatment system currently in place.  
 
Impacts on Owners/Operators of Covered Buildings:  Any owner or operator of a building 
that meets the ASHRAE Standard 188-2018 criteria also needs to implement a water 
management program to minimize the growth and transmission of Legionella bacteria. The 
Department of Legislative Services did not obtain sufficient information to evaluate the 
scope of affected buildings in the State, but it could potentially affect buildings owned by 
the State, local governments, and small businesses. Baltimore City Public Schools noted 
that they already have Legionella bacteria plans in place for their buildings that have 
HVAC systems that include cooling towers.  
 
Effect on Small Businesses that Provide Services Required Under the Bill  
 
For small businesses that provide goods and services needed to meet the bill’s 
requirements, such as water sampling and testing services and supplies, certified testing 
laboratories, plumbing companies, and companies that provide the materials necessary to 
upgrade systems, the bill may result in a meaningful increase in the demand for their 
products and services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 512 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 264 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 204/ Page 12 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Environmental 
Service; 
Baltimore 
City; 
Harford, 
Montgomery, 
and 
Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
University 
System 
of 
Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 12