START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 202 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 202 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Social Isolation and Loneliness Pilot Grant Program - 
Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Social Isolation and Loneliness Pilot Grant Program in the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to (1) examine the impact of social isolation and 
loneliness on vulnerable communities; (2) encourage programming to alleviate the 
negative health effects caused by social isolation and loneliness; (3) target populations in 
the State at increased risk for social isolation and loneliness; and (4) inform future policy 
and programming to reduce social isolation and loneliness. For fiscal 2028, the Governor 
must include $100,000 in the operating budget for the program. The bill also establishes 
requirements for the distribution of grants and reporting requirements related to the 
program. The bill takes effect on October 1, 2026, and terminates on March 31, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $28,700 in FY 2027 for 
contractual staff. Future years reflect ongoing costs, the bill’s mandated appropriation, and 
termination of the program in FY 2030. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a 
mandated appropriation for FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
28,700 
140,900 
42,600 
22,200 
0 
Net Effect 
($28,700) 
($140,900) 
($42,600) 
($22,200) 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 202/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Eligible entity” means an entity or organization that serves patients, 
clients, or programming participants vulnerable to the adverse health effects of social 
isolation and loneliness, as determined by MDH.  
 
Grant Distribution 
 
The program must award a grant to five eligible entities for the costs associated with 
maintaining or expanding a program that targets vulnerable populations with 
socioemotional support to address social isolation and loneliness. The grants may cover 
operating costs, including those associated with venue fees, personnel, and licensing fees, 
but may not be used for capital expenditures or research or development programs.   
 
The program must collaborate with the Maryland Department of Aging, the Governor’s 
Office for Children, and the Department of Housing and Community Development when 
awarding grants, and must prioritize youth, senior, and rural populations. A grant may not 
exceed $20,000.  
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 1, 2029, MDH must conduct an evaluation of the program and report its 
findings to the Governor and the General Assembly. The report must include (1) an 
accounting of financial receipts and expenditures; (2) any progress made in the 
jurisdictions of grant recipients based on outcome metrics produced by the recipients; and 
(3) the impact of program activities on treating and serving patients, clients, and program 
participants.  
 
Current Law:  The State has established various task forces and commissions to study 
different facets of mental and behavioral health in Maryland, including the Commission on 
Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access, the Behavioral Health Advisory Council, 
and the Maryland Commission on Health Equity.  
 
Chapter 437 of 2022 created the Howard County and Montgomery County Adult Day 
Health Care Services Pilot Program and a corresponding task force. The pilot program 
includes activities and social engagement to assist participants in reducing loneliness and 
depression. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that one regular full-time and one regular part‑time 
(50%) position would be needed to manage the grant program. Under these assumptions, 
MDH general fund expenditures would increase by $141,865 beginning in fiscal 2027. This 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 202/ Page 3 
estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the added responsibilities 
incurred by this legislation are not permanent and the amount of grant funding under the 
bill is small and intended for only one year. Therefore, this estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part-time (50%) policy analyst (beginning January 1, 2027) to create the grant 
application, vet applicants, issue and monitor grant funds, complete the required evaluation 
of the program, and submit the final report by December 1, 2029. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2027 FY 2028 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$20,909 
$39,462 
Mandated Appropriation for Grants 
0 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    7,752       1,403 
Total State Expenditures 
$28,661 $140,865 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. The contractual position 
terminates on December 31, 2029, following submission of the report. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Certain small businesses may qualify for grants under the 
program.  
 
Additional Comments:  In 2023, the U.S. Surgeon General issued an advisory on 
loneliness as a public health issue, as it can increase the risk of premature death, disease, 
heart disease, stroke, anxiety, depression, and dementia. The Surgeon General also issued 
a National Strategy to Advance Social Connection based on six pillars, including 
mobilizing the health sector, strengthening social infrastructure in local communities, 
building a culture of connection, and enacting pro-connection public policies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 202/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Governor’s Office; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4