START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 267 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 267 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of 
Elections) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Campaign Finance Entities - Oversight and Control of Campaign 
Funds 
 
 
This departmental bill makes changes to State campaign finance law provisions governing 
the management of campaign funds by (1) adjusting and clarifying certain roles, 
responsibilities, and procedures relating to the receipt and disbursement of campaign funds, 
including authorizing the treasurer of a campaign finance entity to designate authorized 
agents to make disbursements and assist with filings, and (2) allowing for increased civil 
penalties for certain violations. The bill also modifies a provision governing the 
appointment of a campaign manager. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues may increase annually beginning in FY 2027. 
Expenditures are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 267/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Role of the Treasurer – and – Receipt of Campaign Funds 
 
The bill establishes that the treasurer of a campaign finance entity is the financial steward 
of the campaign finance entity. The bill modifies an existing requirement so that all assets 
received by or on behalf of the campaign finance entity must be delivered to the campaign 
finance entity rather than to the treasurer; however, as is required under current law, the 
assets must be maintained by the treasurer for the purposes of the campaign finance entity. 
The bill also clarifies that the assets must be accounted for in accordance with existing 
accounting requirements and are considered owned by the campaign finance entity. 
 
Disbursement of Funds – and – Designated Authorized Agents 
 
The bill alters an existing requirement that assets of a campaign finance entity be disbursed 
only if they have passed through the hands of the treasurer and in accordance with the 
purposes of the entity. Instead, assets of a campaign finance entity may be disbursed only 
if accounted for in accordance with existing accounting requirements and only in 
accordance with the purposes of the entity and State campaign finance law. 
 
The bill repeals a provision that authorizes the chairman of a campaign finance entity to 
approve a disbursement on behalf of the campaign finance entity when the treasurer is 
temporarily unable to perform the duties of the office. Instead, the bill authorizes the 
treasurer to designate authorized agents of the campaign finance entity to make 
disbursements on behalf of and in accordance with the purpose of the campaign finance 
entity. The designation of an authorized agent must be made in writing before the first 
disbursement is made by the authorized agent. Any action taken by the designated 
authorized agent on behalf of the campaign finance entity is the responsibility of the 
treasurer. A designated authorized agent (1) has a fiduciary duty to the campaign finance 
entity for the agent’s conduct in making disbursements on behalf of the campaign finance 
entity and (2) must confirm the agent’s understanding of the fiduciary duty by signing a 
written designation that includes a statement of the duty.  
 
A designated authorized agent may assist the treasurer in the preparation of any required 
filings with SBE. A campaign finance report filed by a campaign finance entity must 
include the written designations naming the authorized agents who may act on the 
treasurer’s behalf. 
 
The bill modifies a provision that prohibits a chairman who is a candidate from approving 
a disbursement for a campaign finance entity, so that it instead prohibits any candidate 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 267/ Page 3 
from having access to, or making a disbursement for a campaign finance entity from, funds 
deposited in the designated campaign account. 
 
The bill also prohibits the treasurer of a political action committee of a political party from 
approving any disbursement of the political action committee’s assets, or incurring any 
liability on its behalf, without authority and direction from the chair of the political action 
committee. 
 
Appointment of a Campaign Manager 
 
The bill modifies a provision that governs the appointment of a campaign manager by  
(1) clarifying that a campaign manager may be appointed by a candidate or chair of a 
campaign finance entity (instead of by “an individual”) and (2) requiring the form making 
the appointment to be filed with SBE (rather than with the board where the individual is 
required to file a certificate of candidacy). 
 
Civil Penalties 
 
The bill also establishes the amount of a civil penalty for a violation of (1) the bill’s 
requirement that the designation of an authorized agent must be made in writing before the 
first disbursement is made by the authorized agent and (2) existing requirements that if a 
chair or treasurer of a campaign finance entity has a compensation agreement with the 
campaign finance entity, before making a disbursement for the compensation, a copy of 
the agreement and the written consent of the candidate (if it is an authorized candidate 
campaign committee) must be submitted to SBE. The campaign finance entity or other 
person that committed the violation must pay a civil penalty of $1,000 plus the amount of 
the disbursement made without the required approval. 
 
Terminology 
 
The bill updates terminology by changing references to “chairman,” to “chair.” 
 
Current Law:   
 
Campaign Finance Entities 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article must be conducted through a campaign finance entity 
(defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the Election Law Article). 
An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration of intent until the 
individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized candidate campaign 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 267/ Page 4 
committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to promote the 
candidate’s candidacy).  
 
Responsible Officers 
 
A campaign finance entity must have a chairman and a treasurer who are the responsible 
officers of a campaign finance entity. A campaign finance entity may not receive or 
disburse money or any other thing of value if there is a vacancy in the office of chairman 
or the office of treasurer. The chairman and treasurer are jointly and severally responsible 
for (1) filing all campaign finance reports in full and accurate detail and (2) except as 
otherwise provided under State campaign finance law, all other actions of the entity. 
 
Campaign Accounts and Disbursements  
 
All assets received by or on behalf of a campaign finance entity must be delivered to and 
maintained by the treasurer for the purposes of the campaign finance entity. A campaign 
finance entity must deposit all funds received in a designated campaign account. Assets 
may be disbursed only if they have passed through the hands of the treasurer and only in 
accordance with the purposes of the entity. Generally, a campaign finance entity may make 
a disbursement only from a designated campaign account and only by check or an 
electronic method authorized by SBE by regulation. A petty cash fund may be maintained, 
however, and expenses paid from other funds may be reimbursed from the campaign 
account if supported by a receipt. 
 
If the treasurer of a campaign finance entity is temporarily unable to perform the duties of 
the office, the chairman of the campaign finance entity may approve a disbursement on 
behalf of the campaign finance entity in the same manner as the treasurer, subject to a 
reporting requirement regarding the disbursement. A chairman who is a candidate, 
however, may not approve a disbursement for a campaign finance entity. 
 
The treasurer of a State or county central committee of a political party may not approve 
any disbursement of the central committee’s assets, or incur any liability on its behalf, 
without authority and direction from the chairman of the central committee. 
 
Compensation Agreement 
 
If a responsible officer of a campaign finance entity has a compensation agreement with 
the campaign finance entity, before making a disbursement for the compensation, the 
campaign finance entity must submit to SBE (1) a copy of the compensation agreement 
and (2) if the campaign finance entity is an authorized candidate campaign committee, the 
written consent of the candidate. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 267/ Page 5 
Campaign Manager 
 
An individual may appoint a campaign manager by (1) completing a form that SBE 
prescribes and that includes the name and address of the campaign manager and (2) filing 
the form with the board where the individual is required to file a certificate of candidacy. 
“Campaign manager” means a person designated by the candidate, or the candidate’s 
representative, to exercise general overall responsibility for the conduct of the candidate’s 
political campaign. 
 
Campaign Finance Civil Penalties 
 
SBE is authorized to impose a civil penalty for various campaign violations, including  
(1) making a disbursement in an unauthorized manner or by an unauthorized method;  
(2) failure to maintain a campaign bank account; (3) failure to maintain detailed and 
accurate account books and records; (4) fundraising during the General Assembly session 
in an unauthorized manner; (5) failure to sufficiently report all contributions received and 
expenditures made on a campaign finance report; (6) failure to include an authority line on 
campaign material; (7) failure to retain a copy of campaign material; (8) failure to disclose 
the use of a bot to publish, distribute, or disseminate online campaign material;  
(9) soliciting a recurring contribution or donation without the affirmative consent of the 
contributor or donor; (10) making a monetary contribution or monetary donation using any 
currency other than United States currency or accepting a monetary contribution or 
monetary donation made using any currency other than United States currency; and  
(11) making a monetary expenditure using any currency other than United States currency. 
 
The civil penalty may not exceed $1,000 for each violation, with the exception of 
fundraising during the General Assembly session in an unauthorized manner, which is 
subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 plus the amount of the contribution received.  
 
The civil penalty must be paid by the campaign finance entity, unless it has insufficient 
funds, in which case it is the joint and several liability of the responsible officers of the 
campaign finance entity. If a violation is committed by a person not acting on behalf of, or 
at the request or suggestion of, a candidate or a campaign finance entity, the civil penalty 
must be paid by the person who committed the violation. 
 
Background:  SBE indicates that the bill (1) clarifies the roles and responsibilities of 
campaign finance entities, their treasurers, and treasurers’ agents and (2) encourages 
compliance by requiring pre-disbursement internal controls that identify and prevent 
improper use of campaign funding. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent the bill’s civil penalty authority results in 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 267/ Page 6 
increased collection of civil penalties. The extent of any increase cannot be reliably 
estimated. Civil penalty revenues are distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund, 
which holds funds for public campaign financing of gubernatorial tickets under the Public 
Financing Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 153 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 267/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Oversight of Campaign Finance Management 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 267 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
State Board of Elections 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The proposal exclusively affects individual candidates and their staff and campaign 
committees, and will have no impact on small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7