START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 215 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 215 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Health 
 
 
Continuing Care Providers - Financial Stress Tests, Transparency, and 
Governing Bodies 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA), at least once a year, to 
conduct a financial stress test for a continuing care in a retirement community provider. 
MDOA must hire two analysts to perform and prepare reports on the financial stress tests. 
After reviewing a financial stress test report, MDOA’s Financial Review Committee must 
assign a grade to indicate the financial stability of the provider. The assigned grade must 
be publicly available on MDOA’s website. The bill also makes changes relating to 
providers’ quarterly meetings and governing body membership. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOA special fund expenditures increase by at least $270,500 in FY 2027 
for personnel and contractual services, as discussed below. Future years reflect elimination 
of one-time costs, annualization, and ongoing costs. Special fund revenues to the 
Continuing Care Fund may increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as 
FY 2027 and offset expenditures (not shown), as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$270,500 
$200,900 
$209,900 
$219,100 
$228,300 
Net Effect 
($270,500) 
($200,900) 
($209,900) 
($219,100) 
($228,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 215/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Financial Stress Test 
 
The financial stress test must examine the provider’s community occupancy rates, net 
operating margin, liquidity, capital structure, operating ratio, debt service coverage, 
average age of community infrastructure and assets, cushion ratio, cash to debt ratio, risk 
from current and proposed investments, corporate structure, interstate financial 
transactions, and any other indicator of financial performance and durability selected by 
MDOA. 
 
Governing Body Meetings 
 
The bill specifies that each continuing care at home provider must hold, at least quarterly, 
a meeting open to all the provider’s subscribers. 
 
Each continuing care in a retirement community provider must hold, at least quarterly, a 
meeting with the provider’s resident association. The provider may determine whether the 
meeting is open to all the provider’s subscribers. At least twice a year, the required meeting 
with the resident association must be held in person at the facility represented by the 
resident association. 
 
A copy of the agendas and minutes of these required meetings must be made available to 
the provider’s subscribers. 
 
Governing Body Membership 
 
The bill requires a regular or alternate member of the governing body of a provider who is 
selected to meet specified requirements to be elected by the resident association of the 
facility rather than selected according to the same general written standards and criteria 
used to select other members. 
 
If members of the governing body have different powers and responsibilities regarding 
asset control and financial consequences for subscribers, an elected subscriber member 
must have at least the same powers and responsibilities as the other members who hold the 
most powers and responsibilities regarding asset control and financial consequences for 
subscribers.  
 
Current Law:  “Continuing care in a retirement community” means providing shelter and 
either medical and nursing or other health‑related services or making the services readily 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 215/ Page 3 
accessible through the provider or an affiliate of the provider, whether or not the services 
are specifically offered in written agreement for shelter (1) to an individual who is at least 
age 60 and not related by blood or marriage to the provider; (2) for the life of the individual 
or for a period exceeding one year; and (3) under one or more written agreements that 
require a transfer of assets or an entrance fee notwithstanding periodic changes. 
 
“Continuing care at home” means providing medical, nursing, or other health-related 
services directly or by contractual agreement (1) to an individual who is at least age 60 and 
not related by blood or marriage to the provider for the life of the individual or for a period 
exceeding one year and (2) under a written agreement that requires a transfer of assets or 
an entrance fee notwithstanding periodic charges. “Continuing care at home” includes 
helping with the physical maintenance of the individual’s dwelling. 
 
An application for a preliminary certificate of registration as a provider must include, 
among other things, a certified financial statement and an income statement. An 
annual application for certificate renewal must include an audited financial statement, an 
operating budget, a cash flow projection, and an actuarial study (submitted every 
three years). MDOA currently conducts financial reviews of continuing care providers. 
 
Financial Review Committee 
 
MDOA’s Financial Review Committee is a voluntary group of seven experts appointed by 
the Secretary of Aging for three-year terms. At the request of MDOA, the committee 
evaluates the financial condition of providers who are experiencing financial difficulty and 
recommends what action the department should take.  
 
The committee must notify MDOA in writing whether the committee recommends that the 
department (1) find a provider in financial difficulty, and (2) find that the financial 
difficulty, if any, includes a significant risk of financial failure. MDOA must make a final 
determination of whether financial difficulty exists and if there is a significant risk of 
financial failure. If it is determined that the provider is in financial difficulty, MDOA must 
immediately notify the provider.  
 
The provider must submit a five-year financial plan to correct the cause of the financial 
difficulty. MDOA may consult with the committee before approving the plan. On approval, 
the financial plan must be implemented, and the provider must submit an annual progress 
report to MDOA. MDOA may withhold a renewal certificate of registration or withdraw 
a preliminary, initial, or renewal certificate of registration if (1) the provider does not 
prepare or is unwilling or unable to prepare a financial plan; (2) the financial plan is 
inadequate to correct the current or impending financial condition; or (3) the provider fails 
to implement the financial plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 215/ Page 4 
MDOA may determine that there is a significant risk of financial failure based on one or 
more of the following findings or circumstances:   
 
 
the provider has failed to meet loan covenants that give a lender or a bond trustee 
the option to exercise remedies on its collateral; 
 
an actuarial report has been provided to MDOA reflecting significant underfunding 
of future liabilities that are unlikely to be readily addressed; 
 
there is a significant shortfall by the provider in maintaining required reserves for a 
significant period; 
 
a significant balloon payment or future loan payment will become due within the 
next 12 months and the provider is unable to demonstrate that it will obtain a 
modification from its lender, have the resources to make the payment, or can 
refinance; 
 
there has been a significant decline in the occupancy rate that is likely to have a 
material adverse financial impact on the provider; 
 
there has been a material adverse change in debt service coverage ratio for an 
extended period that reduces the ratio to less than 1.0; 
 
there has been a significant decline in days of cash on hand that is unrelated to 
additions to property, plant, and equipment or other community enhancements and 
that could result in an inability to pay obligations as they become due; 
 
there has been a significant increase in the operating ratio, adjusted for unrealized 
gains and losses on investments, that could result in the inability of the provider to 
meet its obligations; or 
 
the refusal or inability of the provider to provide accurate information or data to 
MDOA. 
 
Governing Body Meetings and Membership 
 
At least quarterly, each provider must hold a meeting open to all the provider’s subscribers. 
The provider must summarize their operations, significant changes from the previous year, 
and goals and objectives for the next year, as well as answer subscribers’ questions. 
 
If a provider has a governing body, at least one of the provider’s subscribers must be a full 
and regular member of the governing body. If a provider owns or operates more than 
three facilities in the State, the governing body must include at least one of the provider’s 
subscribers for every three facilities in the State. 
 
Chapter 331 of 2025 requires the governing body of a continuing care provider that has 
only one subscriber to authorize the appointment of an alternate subscriber to serve as a 
regular member of the governing body if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the 
subscriber’s duties. The alternate subscriber may (1) attend all meetings of the governing 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 215/ Page 5 
body and (2) vote only if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the subscriber’s duties 
as a regular member of the governing body. 
 
A regular or alternate member of the governing body must be selected according to the 
same general written standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing 
body. The governing body must confer with the resident association at each of the 
provider’s facilities before the subscriber officially joins the governing body. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MDOA to:  (1) conduct a financial stress test for a 
provider at least once a year; (2) hire two analysts to perform the financial stress tests and 
prepare reports; (3) assign a grade to indicate the financial stability of the provider; and 
(4) make the grade publicly available on the MDOA website. 
 
Therefore, MDOA special fund expenditures increase by at least $270,528 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of (1) hiring two analysts to conduct financial stress tests, complete the required reports, 
assist the Financial Review Committee in assigning a provider a financial stability grade, 
and ensure the grade is published on the MDOA website; and (2) contractual services for 
the development and maintenance of a financial grading system to be used by the 
committee. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$144,746 
Contractual Services 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    25,782 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$270,528 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Provider Fees 
 
The Continuing Care Fund is used to defray the costs of administering continuing care 
statutory requirements. The special, nonlapsing fund consists of all continuing care 
provider fees, money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, fund investment 
earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the fund’s benefit. 
 
MDOA advises that counting care provider fee increases may be needed to offset the costs 
of the bill. To the extent that provider fees increase as a result of the bill, special fund 
revenues to the fund increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as fiscal 2027 
and may be used to offset expenses under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 215/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  In Maryland, there are 36 continuing care in retirement 
community facilities and 3 continuing care at home locations. MDOA advises that there 
are 2 additional planned continuing care in retirement community facilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6