START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 341 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 341 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Commission for Boys' and Men's Health - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Mental Health in the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The commission must (1) review health data to 
inform strategies to reduce negative health outcomes of boys and men; (2) collaborate with 
partners to advise on policies and programs; (3) promote gender and culturally responsive 
care across the State; and (4) monitor federal and State policy and legislation. A member 
of the commission may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. Each unit of State government must fully cooperate with the commission in the 
performance of its duties. By September 30 of each year, the commission must submit 
recommendations for policy changes that further the commission’s goals to the Governor, 
the Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health Committee. Beginning in 2028 and 
biannually thereafter, the report must include progress indicators and data trends. The 
commission may not adopt regulations.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent MDH must staff the commission, general fund expenditures 
increase by $138,100 in FY 2027 for personnel. Future years reflect annualization and 
ongoing expenses. To the commission accepts federal or private funding, federal/special 
funds increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as FY 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
138,100 
159,600 
167,100 
174,800 
182,500 
Net Effect 
($138,100) 
($159,600) 
($167,100) 
($174,800) 
($182,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 341/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Commission Membership 
 
The commission consists of members appointed by the Governor, the President of the 
Senate, and the Speaker of the House. Certain members must be appointed from among 
applicants nominated and recommended by organizations in the State whose interests relate 
to boys’ and men’s health or family involvement, while others must be appointed from 
applicants applying on their own behalf. Uncodified language requires the Governor, the 
President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House to ensure geographic, demographic, 
and professional diversity among commission membership to the extent possible. 
 
A term of a member is four years. The appointing authority may authorize a member to 
serve a second consecutive term without going through the formal appointment process. A 
member may not serve more than two consecutive terms. A member who does not attend 
at least half of the regularly scheduled meetings during a 12-month period is considered to 
have resigned from the commission. The commission must elect a chair and a vice chair 
from among its members and may appoint any officers that it considers necessary. 
 
Duties of the Commission  
 
The commission must perform the following duties and consider population diversity when 
doing so: 
 
 
periodically review health data to inform strategies aimed at reducing negative 
health outcomes of boys and men for specific health conditions; 
 
collaborate with partners to shape and advise on policies and programs, as specified; 
 
promote gender and culturally responsive care across the health care system in the 
State; and 
 
monitor federal and State policy and legislation that may affect areas of boys’ and 
men’s health and family involvement. 
 
Acceptance of Funding 
 
Subject to approval of the Secretary of Health, the commission may accept (1) federal funds 
and (2) private gifts and donations from individuals, private organizations, or foundations. 
The acceptance and use of federal funds may not be considered a commitment of 
State funds and does not obligate the General Assembly to continue the purpose for which 
the funds are available.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 341/ Page 3 
Current Law: Chapter 442 of 2006 established the Commission for Men’s Health, which 
terminated on September 30, 2010. The commission was responsible for: 
 
 
developing strategies and programs; 
 
reviewing the health status of men in Maryland and focusing on health outcomes of 
men for specific diseases; 
 
organizing community workshops to identify issues affecting men’s health and 
family involvement; 
 
monitoring State and federal policy and legislation that may affect the areas of 
men’s health and family involvement; and 
 
recommending assistance, services, and policy changes to further the commission’s 
goals. 
 
Maryland Commission for Women 
 
There is a Maryland Commission for Women in the Department of Human Services, which 
works to advance solutions and to expand social, political, and economic opportunities for 
all women. The commission must: 
 
 
stimulate and encourage study and review of the status of women in the State; 
 
strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems confronting women 
as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers; 
 
recommend methods of overcoming discrimination against women in public and 
private employment; 
 
encourage women to become candidates for public office; 
 
promote more effective methods for enabling women to develop their skills, 
continue their education, and to be retrained; 
 
secure appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and contributions to 
the State; 
 
work to develop healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s 
responsibilities; and 
 
inform the Executive and Legislative branches on issues concerning women, 
including offering testimony on these issues. 
 
The commission may (1) act as a clearinghouse for activities to avoid duplication of effort 
and (2) make surveys and appoint advisory committees in the fields of education, social 
services, labor laws and employment policies, law enforcement, health and safety, new and 
expanded services, legal rights, family relations, human relations, and volunteer services. 
The commission must submit an annual report to the Governor and General Assembly.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 341/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  The bill does not specify which entity is responsible for staffing the 
commission. This analysis assumes MDH must staff the commission as it is established 
within the department. Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $138,050 
in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one full-time and one part-time health policy analyst to staff the 
commission, collect health data, conduct research, and draft the annual report (including 
preparation of biennial progress indicators and data trends). It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one‑time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$120,233 
Operating Expenses 
    17,817 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$138,050 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1552 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4