START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 354 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 354 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland Port Administration - Acquisition of Land in Anne Arundel County - 
Notice of Public Hearing 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Port Administration (MPA) to provide written notice to the 
Anne Arundel County Delegation to the General Assembly at least two weeks before the 
announcement of a public hearing held pursuant to a current law provision that prohibits 
MPA from acquiring any interest in land or improvements on land in the county without 
the prior approval of the county, given after a public hearing.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MPA can notify the Anne Arundel County Delegation using existing 
budgeted resources; however, MPA may not always be able to meet the two-week deadline 
required by the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to specified requirements and prohibitions, MPA may acquire in 
its own name, by purchase or by condemnation, any property, including any public land, 
land lying under water, or riparian right, necessary or convenient to construct or operate 
any project. However, in order to purchase or condemn any property located in any political 
subdivision of the State (i.e., a county, Baltimore City, or a municipality), MPA must make 
a written request for approval to the appropriate local government. A request is deemed to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 354/ Page 2 
have been approved unless MPA is notified in writing within 90 days that the request has 
not been approved. 
 
Specific to Anne Arundel County, MPA may not acquire any interest in land or 
improvements on land in the county without the prior approval of Anne Arundel County, 
given after a public hearing.  
 
State Expenditures:  MPA can provide written notice using existing budgeted resources. 
However, Anne Arundel County handles the planning, organizing, and scheduling of the 
public hearings required before it may approve MPA acquisitions of interest in land or 
improvements on land in the county. Because MPA is not involved with the scheduling of 
the public hearings, if the county does not provide sufficient advance notice to MPA 
regarding its plan to hold a hearing, MPA may not be able to provide written notice to the 
delegation at least two weeks before the announcement of such a hearing.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 53 (Senator Simonaire) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Anne Arundel County; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2