START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 344 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 344 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Sale of Motor Fuel - Pricing Signage 
 
 
This bill alters the pricing signage requirements for retail service stations by requiring the 
prominent display of the standard price for motor fuel products; it also repeals existing 
signage requirements. Additionally, this bill authorizes the Comptroller to assess penalties 
for violations after a written warning and an opportunity to cure. This bill takes effect on 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be handled with existing budgeted resources. New 
penalty provisions are not expected to materially affect general fund revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
“Conditional price” means a price that is available to a customer only if a condition is met, 
including a service level, employment in a membership program, a required purchase, a 
payment method, or any other condition modifying the standard price. 
 
“Standard price” means the offering price available to all customers without conditions. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 344/ Page 2 
Signage Requirements 
 
A retail service station dealer must maintain a sign on the premises that (1) prominently 
displays clearly and visibly the standard price; (2) states the unit of measurement used; and 
(3) is positioned to be readable by passing motorists. The sign may also display clearly and 
visibly the standard price for diesel and other motor fuel products. If a sign displays a 
conditional price, the price may not be displayed more prominently than the standard price.  
 
All numerals on the sign must be uniform, the same size, and at least 8 inches high and 3.5 
inches wide with a brush stroke of at least 1 inch. Any numerals used in a fraction or letters 
on the sign must be at least one-third the height of the numerals used for whole numbers. 
If a new sign is needed to comply with the bill. the supplier of the gasoline must provide 
the sign and numerals at no cost to the service station dealer.  
 
Violations and Penalties  
 
The Comptroller is authorized to assess a person who violates the pricing signage 
regulations. For a first violation, the fine is $100. For a second or subsequent violation, the 
fine is equal to the amount of the initial fine of $100 multiplied by the total number of 
violations.  
 
Before issuing a fine, the Comptroller must issue a written warning explaining the specific 
violation. The Comptroller must also provide the person with a reasonable opportunity to 
cure the violation. All fines collected under these provisions are paid to the general fund. 
Additionally, the bill requires the Comptroller to establish a process for individuals to 
report violations.  
 
Current Law:  Retail service stations (i.e., retail businesses where motor fuel is sold) must 
meet various registration, inspection, and signage requirements. Under the Gas Price 
Clarity Act (House Bill 882 of 2024), stations are required to prominently display the credit 
and debit price (if higher than the cash price) or the credit and debit price and the cash price 
for a whole measurement unit of regular gasoline sold.  
 
All dispensing equipment for motor fuel must be marked conspicuously to show in 
numerals of equal size the price (including taxes) of a gallon of the motor fuel offered for 
sale. If the price includes a fraction of a fractional, the combined height and width of the 
numerator and denominator must equal the height and width of the other whole numbers 
used. 
 
Failure to comply with provisions related to the inspection and sale of motor fuel is a 
misdemeanor and is subject to a maximum penalty of a $5,000 fine and/or one year 
imprisonment. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 344/ Page 3 
Generally, signs regulated by the above requirements (or other State law or by federal law) 
may be regulated by the local zoning authority and must be consistent with the local law, 
ordinance, or regulation governing signs. However, a sign required at a service station 
pursuant to the requirements above (or any other State or federal law) is exempt from the 
provisions of a local law, ordinance, or regulation for the purpose of determining (1) the 
total number of signs permitted and (2) the area of signs permitted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 303 (Senator Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3