START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 334 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 334 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Constitutional Violations - Prohibited 
 
   
This bill requires, as a condition of submitting a bid or proposal on a State procurement, 
each bidder or offeror to certify that neither the bidder nor offeror nor any of their affiliates 
is engaging in actions that violate the U.S. Constitution or Maryland Constitution, and that 
they will refrain from engaging in such actions for the duration of any applicable 
contractual obligations. The bill also requires each State procurement contract to include a 
clause affirming this certification. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Affiliate” means an entity with a corporate or legal relationship with the 
bidder or offeror, including shared ownership or control or an economic relationship or 
partnership, including marketing or promotion. “Bidder or offeror” includes any division 
of the bidder or offeror, even if it is unrelated to the procurement activity. 
 
Current Law:  Every State procurement contract must have clauses covering: 
 
 
termination for default; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 334/ Page 2 
 
termination wholly or partly by the State for its convenience if the head of the 
primary procurement unit determines that termination is appropriate; 
 
variations that occur between estimated and actual quantities of work in a 
procurement contract; 
 
liquidated damages, as appropriate; 
 
specified excuses for nonperformance; 
 
except for real property leases, the unilateral right of the State to order in writing:  
(1) changes in the work, if the changes are within the scope of the procurement 
contract and (2) a temporary stop or delay in performance; 
 
the obligation of the contractor to comply with the political contribution reporting 
requirements under State election law to which the contractor may be subject; and  
 
nonvisual access for information technology. 
 
Additionally, procurement contracts for construction must include (1) a clause providing 
for contract modification if the condition of a site differs from the condition described in 
the specifications, and (2) a clause covering the requirements for notice of contract claims, 
submission of contract claims and resolution of contract claims. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Office of the Attorney 
General; University System of Maryland; Department of General Services; Board of Public 
Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2