START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 313 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 313 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Residential Housing - Rental Applications and Tenant 
Screening 
 
 
This bill generally establishes numerous guidelines in regard to rental applications and 
prospective tenant screening. Among other provisions, the bill (1) prohibits landlords from 
collecting application or screening fees unless certain conditions are satisfied; (2) requires 
specified disclosures before “adverse action” may be taken against prospective tenants; and 
(3) authorizes prospective tenants to dispute inaccurate information within a tenant 
screening report. A prospective tenant may not waive any of the protections established 
under the bill and any attempted waiver is void. Violators of various provisions within the 
bill are subject to civil penalties; certain violations are also deemed unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practices under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA) and 
subject to MCPA’s civil penalty provisions. Individuals injured by certain violations may 
also seek specified relief in a civil action. The Attorney General may adopt regulations to 
implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s penalty provisions are not anticipated to have a material impact 
on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer Protection 
Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not have a material impact on local government finances or 
operations.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 313/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions  
 
“Adverse action” means (1) denial of a prospective tenant’s rental application;  
(2) conditional acceptance of a prospective tenant’s rental application; or (3) placement of 
a prospective tenant on a waiting list. 
 
“Proceeding” means a failure to pay rent proceeding initiated by a landlord under Title 8, 
Subtitle 4 of the Real Property Article not resulting in a judgment of possession in favor of 
the landlord. It includes the filing of a petition by a landlord for the failure of a tenant to 
pay rent regardless of whether a hearing is held by the court. 
 
“Shielded record” means a record protected from public inspection under Title 8,  
Subtitle 5 of the Real Property Article or that the court has otherwise sealed or ordered 
inaccessible to members of the public. It includes a record shielded, suppressed, or sealed 
in another jurisdiction under provisions equivalent to those of the State. 
 
Fee Collection and Mandatory Disclosures  
 
Landlords may only collect an application or screening fee if the rental unit is either 
currently available for lease or will become available within 30 days after receipt of the 
application. Prior to accepting such fees, the landlord must provide a written disclosure to 
the prospective tenant that includes: 
 
 
the information contained in a tenant screening report; 
 
criteria that may result in a denial or conditional acceptance of an application; 
 
the name and contact information for any screening agency or service the landlord 
utilizes; and 
 
the maximum amount the landlord may charge for the application fee. 
 
A violator is subject to a civil penalty of up to $500 for each violation. A violation is also 
an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA and subject to its civil penalty 
provisions. An individual injured by a violation may also seek injunctive relief and a refund 
of any application or screening fee.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 313/ Page 3 
Adverse Action and Dispute Procedures  
 
Generally, a landlord must follow specific procedures if a landlord intends to take adverse 
action against a tenant. A landlord must provide the prospective tenant with a written notice 
that states the specific reasons for the adverse action and identifies the screening report or 
other information the landlord relied upon when considering the prospective tenant. The 
notice must also indicate that the landlord did not consider any shielded records or 
proceedings. Furthermore, the bill (1) requires landlords to provide the prospective tenant 
with a copy of any screening report used in the determination; (2) requires the landlord to 
notify the prospective tenant of the right to dispute the report; and (3) authorizes 
prospective tenants to dispute and provide evidence regarding inaccurate or incomplete 
information in the screening report. 
 
A violator is subject to a civil penalty of up to $500 for each violation. A violation is also 
an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA and subject to its civil penalty 
provisions. An individual injured by a violation may also seek injunctive relief and a refund 
of any application or screening fee.  
 
Prohibition on Shielded Records and Proceedings  
 
A landlord may not request, require, or inquire about information concerning a proceeding 
against the prospective tenant or shielded records, nor may they be considered in making a 
rental determination. The bill prohibits landlords from conditionally accepting an 
application contingent on the disclosure of proceedings/shielded records or taking adverse 
action if a tenant refuses to disclose them.  
 
A violator is subject to a civil penalty of up to $500 for each violation. An individual injured 
by a violation may also bring an action for damages, a refund of any application or 
screening fee, injunctive and other equitable relief, and reasonable attorney’s fees and court 
costs.  
 
Tenant Screening Reports 
 
A person responsible for producing tenant screening reports must implement and maintain 
reasonable procedures to prevent the disclosure of information regarding a proceeding or 
shielded record and may not disclose information about a proceeding/shielded record. A 
person disclosing information of a proceeding or shielded record must provide a corrected 
tenant screening report with the improperly disclosed information removed to all parties 
within five business days after learning of the disclosure.   
 
An individual injured by a violation may bring an action for injunctive or other equitable 
relief, including requiring a tenant screening company to send corrective notice.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 313/ Page 4 
Current Law: 
 
Shielded Records – Failure to Pay Rent 
 
Generally, in failure to pay rent proceedings, the District Court is required to shield all 
related court records if the proceeding did not result in a judgment of possession. If a 
judgment of possession was entered by the court, the District Court may shield all records 
on motion by a tenant if (1) the tenant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
tenant exercised the right of redemption and at least 12 months has passed since the final 
resolution of the proceeding, or (2) the District court determines good cause to shield the 
records.  
 
In limited circumstances, a tenant may petition the court to shield court records relating to 
any action for repossession for failure to pay rent if the failure to pay rent was due to a loss 
of income arising out of the COVID-19 pandemic. A petition may not be filed until the 
appeal period for the action has lapsed. However, these only apply to court records in 
failure to pay rent actions that were filed on or after March 5, 2020, but before  
January 1, 2022; the provisions are also not applicable to any record relating to an action 
for repossession for failure to pay rent that resulted in a money judgment in favor of a 
landlord unless the petitioner provides evidence to the court that the judgment has been 
satisfied.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 313/ Page 5 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small business 
landlords who are prohibited from taking specified actions and subject to certain penalties 
and private civil actions upon a violation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5