START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 368 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 368 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George's County - Supplemental Homeowners' Property Tax Credit - 
Required  
PG 412-26 
 
 
This bill requires Prince George’s County to grant a property tax credit to supplement the 
State Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies 
to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) currently 
administers other county supplemental Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Programs and 
can administer the tax credit required by the bill with existing budgeted resources. Any 
additional costs incurred by the department are subject to reimbursement from 
Prince George’s County.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential decrease in Prince George’s County revenues beginning in 
FY 2027. Expenditures may increase to reimburse SDAT for administrative costs. This 
bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires Prince George’s County to grant a property tax credit to 
supplement the State homeowners’ property tax credit. The property tax credit is equal to 
the total real property tax of the dwelling, less specified percentages of the combined 
income of the homeowner. The maximum assessment against which the homeowners’ 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 368/ Page 2 
property tax credit may be granted is $300,000. To be eligible for the tax credit, a 
homeowner’s combined net worth may not exceed $200,000 and combined income may 
not exceed $75,000. The percentages applied to the combined income that are used to 
calculate the amount of the property tax credit are (1) 0% of the first $8,000 of combined 
income; (2) 4.0% of the next $4,000 of combined income; (3) 6.5% of the next $4,000 of 
combined income; and (4) 9% of the combined income over $16,000. 
 
Current Law:  The Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program is a State-funded program 
that provides credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who 
qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. The fiscal 2027  
State budget includes $56.0 million in funding for the program. Approximately 
45,000 individuals are eligible to receive the property tax credit each year.   
 
County supplemental property tax credits are provided to eligible homeowners in 
Baltimore City and the following counties:  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Caroline, 
Carrol, Charles, Frederick, Garret, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Washington.  
 
Baltimore County provides a local supplement to the State Homeowners’ Property Tax 
Credit Program. The maximum assessment against which the county’s existing 
supplemental homeowners’ property tax credit may be granted is $300,000. To be eligible 
for the tax credit, a homeowner’s combined net worth may not exceed $200,000 and 
combined income may not exceed $60,000. The percentages applied to the combined 
income that are used to calculate the amount of the property tax credit are (1) 0% of the 
first $4,000 of combined income; (2) 0% of the next $4,000 of combined income; 
(3) 0% of the next $4,000 of combined income; (4) 6.5% of the next $4,000 of combined 
income; and (5) 9% of the combined income over $16,000. 
 
Under the Montgomery County local supplement, the maximum assessment against which 
the county’s existing supplemental homeowners’ property tax credit may be granted is 
$375,000. To be eligible for the tax credit, a homeowner’s combined net worth may not 
exceed $250,000 and combined income may not exceed $75,000. The percentages applied 
to the combined income that are used to calculate the amount of the property tax credit are 
(1) 0% of the first $25,000 of combined income; (2) 2% of the next $7,500 of combined 
income; (3) 5% of the next $10,000 of combined income; (4) 6.5% of the next $10,000 of 
combined income; and (5) 8% of the combined income over $52,500. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the tax credit and eligibility criteria for the State, the existing local 
supplemental programs in Baltimore and Montgomery counties, and the proposed program 
in Prince George’s County. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 368/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
State and County Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Programs 
State 
Baltimore 
Montgomery 
Prince George’s 
Percent of Combined 
Income 
0% of 1st $8,000 
0% of 1st $4,000 
0% of 1st $25,000 
0% of 1st $8,000 
4% of next $4,000 
0% of next $4,000 
2% of next $7,500 
4% of next $4,000 
6.5% of next 
$4,000 
0% of next $4,000 
5% of next $10,000 6.5% of next $4,000 
9% over $16,000 
6.5% of next 
$4,000 
6.5% of next 
$10,000 
9% over $16,000 
 
9% over $16,000 
8% over $52,500 
 
 
 
 
 
Maximum Assessment 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$375,000 
$300,000 
Net Worth 
$200,000 
$200,000 
$250,000 
$200,000 
Combined Income 
$60,000 
$60,000 
$75,000 
$75,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The actual cost to implement a local supplement to the  
State Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program depends on several factors:  including  
(1) the tax liability of the homeowner, which is determined by using the percent of 
combined income; (2) the property assessment; and (3) local property tax rates. 
 
Under the State tax credit program, the maximum tax liability for an individual with a 
combined income of $60,000 totals $4,380; whereas it totals $4,220 for the local 
supplement in Baltimore County and $1,900 for the local supplement in Montgomery 
County. Unlike both the State and the Baltimore County supplement, homeowners in 
Montgomery County can have a combined income of up to $75,000. For these 
homeowners, their maximum tax liability is set at $3,100. 
 
Under the bill, the proposed local supplement in Prince George’s County uses several of 
the same criteria as the State program thereby providing no additional benefit to 
homeowners. For example, the maximum tax liability for an individual with a combined 
income of $60,000 would be the same under both the State and local program. The only 
additional homeowners that would benefit would be those with a combined income 
between $60,000 and $75,000. However, since the percent of combined income and the 
maximum assessment remains unchanged under the bill, additional homeowners in the 
expanded income bracket ($60,000 to $75,000) still may not benefit from the local 
supplement. Under the bill, the maximum tax liability for a homeowner in Prince George’s 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 368/ Page 4 
County with a combined income of $75,000 would total $5,730. Due to the $300,000 limit 
on the maximum property assessment and the current county property tax rate ($1.374 per 
$100 of assessment), the homeowner would not benefit from the local supplement. 
 
Local Programs in Baltimore and Montgomery Counties 
 
The local supplements in both Baltimore and Montgomery counties utilize a lower percent 
of combined income calculation to determine the local supplement, which results in a tax 
benefit to the homeowners. In addition, the maximum property assessment in 
Montgomery County is higher than the State program, which provides additional benefits 
to homeowners.  
 
As a point of reference, Montgomery County provided supplemental property tax credits 
to 4,002 homeowners in fiscal 2023, 4,486 homeowners in fiscal 2024, and 
4,188 homeowners in fiscal 2025. The actual cost for these property tax credits totaled 
$4.9 million in fiscal 2023, $5.7 million in fiscal 2024, and $5.8 million in fiscal 2025. 
Baltimore County provided $1.4 million in supplemental property tax credits in fiscal 2026, 
with the amount of the credit capped at $160 per homeowner.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4