START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 395 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 395 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Water Pollution Control - Discharge Permits - Concentrated Animal Feeding 
Operations 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals a requirement that a person hold a concentrated animal feeding 
operation (CAFO) discharge permit issued by the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) before beginning construction on any part of a new CAFO. The bill 
also repeals a prohibition against MDE issuing a CAFO discharge permit to a person who 
violates this requirement. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.   
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on some CAFOs 
to the extent that construction is able to begin on a new CAFO concurrent with the 
development of an updated CAFO General Discharge Permit (GD permit) by MDE, as 
discussed below.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Federal Clean Water Act  
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 395/ Page 2 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency delegates authority 
to issue NPDES permits to MDE. 
 
State Permitting for Wastewater Discharges  
 
In General:  MDE issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by 
controlling industrial and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are 
regulated through combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater 
discharges are regulated through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
“Discharge permit” is defined in statute as a permit issued by MDE for the discharge of 
any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the waters of the State.  
 
Applicability:  A person must generally hold an MDE discharge permit before constructing, 
installing, modifying, extending, altering, or operating a system, facility, outlet, or 
establishment if its operation could cause or increase the discharge of pollutants into the 
waters of the State. This permitting requirement applies to (1) an industrial, commercial, 
or recreation facility or disposal system; (2) a State-owned treatment facility; or (3) any 
other outlet or establishment. Further, a person must hold a CAFO discharge permit before 
beginning construction on any part of a new CAFO, and MDE is prohibited from issuing a 
CAFO discharge permit to a person who violates this requirement. 
 
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations:  CAFO wastewater discharges are regulated by 
MDE under department regulations and a CAFO GD Permit, which are designed to control 
nutrients from Maryland’s largest agricultural animal operations. The GD Permit serves as 
both a State and federal permit. The most recent CAFO GD Permit expired on July 7, 2025, 
and MDE is in the process of establishing a new GD Permit. MDE anticipates that the new 
GD Permit will be finalized by August 2026. CAFOs that were previously covered under 
the expired GD Permit are operating under an administrative continuance.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Although overall, the bill is anticipated to have minimal impact 
on CAFOs in the State, the bill may offer an opportunity for a new CAFO to begin 
construction concurrent with the development of an updated CAFO GD Permit by MDE. 
This might enable a new CAFO to be operation-ready sooner than under current law. MDE 
notes, however, that a discharge permit for construction may be needed, and that the 
addition of animals would likely need to wait until the CAFO GD Permit is finalized.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 395/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 371 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3