START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 389 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 389 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Juveniles - Detention and Confinement - Limitations on Juvenile Contact With 
Incarcerated Adults 
 
 
This bill limits the circumstances under which a minor may be held, detained, or confined 
in an adult jail or correctional facility. The bill prohibits a child, including one subject to 
adult criminal court jurisdiction, who has been arrested, convicted, or awaiting trial on 
criminal charges from being detained or confined in any institution in which the child has 
contact with or comes within sight or sound of an incarcerated adult. Absent a temporary 
hold for processing, a child who has been arrested, convicted, or is awaiting trial for an 
offense under adult criminal court jurisdiction is prohibited from being held in custody in 
an adult correctional facility. However, a child may be temporarily held for processing in 
an adult jail or correctional or detention facility that does not have a secure juvenile 
detention area if the child is separated by sight and sound from incarcerated adults  
and is held for a period not exceeding six hours, as specified. The bill takes effect 
October 1, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect on total capital spending; however, funding for other capital 
projects is reduced or delayed due to construction costs caused by the bill. Beginning as 
early as FY 2029, general fund expenditures for the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 
increase significantly to operate new facilities and address an expanded DJS population. 
Implementation of the bill may help the State avoid the loss and restricted use of federal 
grant funding as early as FY 2029, as discussed below. The Judiciary can implement the 
bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, local expenditures decrease beginning in 
FY 2029, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate 
on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 389/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, in general, a child alleged to be 
delinquent, and subject to the juvenile court’s jurisdiction, may not be detained in a jail or 
other facility for the detention of adults. However, statute prescribes that a child is eligible 
for – or automatically subject to – the adult criminal court’s jurisdiction if the child is 
alleged to have committed one of specified enumerated offenses and certain conditions 
apply. 
 
Transfer of a Child to Adult Facilities 
 
In general, statute allows a child subject to the adult criminal court’s jurisdiction to be held 
in an adult detention facility. 
 
Under current law, the official in charge of a jail or other facility for the detention of adult 
offenders or persons charged with crime must inform the court or the intake officer 
immediately when a person, who is or appears to be younger than age 18, is received at the 
facility and must deliver him to the court upon request or transfer him to the facility 
designated by the intake officer or the court, unless the court has waived its jurisdiction 
and he is being proceeded against as an adult. When a case is transferred to another court 
for criminal prosecution, the child must promptly be transferred to the appropriate officer 
or adult detention facility in accordance with statute. The bill repeals these provisions. 
 
Transportation with Adults 
 
Under current law, a child may not be transported together with adults who have been 
charged with or convicted of a crime unless the court has waived its jurisdiction and the 
child is being proceeded against as an adult. Under the bill, a child may not be transported 
together with adults who have been charged or convicted of a crime, regardless of the 
jurisdiction over the child. 
 
Pending Placements in Juvenile Facilities 
 
Under current law, pending the determination to transfer jurisdiction of a child, the court 
must order the child to be held in a secure juvenile facility unless (1) the child is released 
on bail, recognizance, or other conditions of pretrial release; (2) there is not available 
capacity in a secure juvenile facility, as determined by DJS; or (3) the court finds that 
detention in a secure juvenile facility would pose a risk of harm to the child or others. If 
the court makes a finding that detention in a secure juvenile facility would pose a risk of 
harm to the child or others, the court must state the reasons for the finding on the record. 
The bill repeals provisions (2) and (3). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 389/ Page 3 
Federal Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
 
The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act (JJDPA) requires states to comply 
with four core requirements:  (1) deinstitutionalization of status offenders; (2) sight and 
sound separation of juveniles from adults in institutions; (3) removal of juveniles from 
adult jails and lockups; and (4) addressing racial and ethnic disparities. The 
2018 reauthorization of the JJDPA required states to come into compliance by 
December 2021, or risk losing federal funding. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Assumption 
 
Neither the bill nor existing statute define “adult correctional facility.” The Youth 
Detention Center (YDC) in Baltimore City houses youth younger than age 18 who are 
charged as adults in Baltimore City and are awaiting trial or serving the beginning of their 
sentence for a conviction as an adult. While YDC’s entire population is younger than age 
18, by function and statute, YDC is operated by the Division of Pretrial Detention and 
Services in the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), not DJS. 
This estimate assumes that YDC can continue to be operated by DPSCS and used for its 
current purpose under the bill. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
The 2018 reauthorization of JJDPA created several new requirements that states must 
comply with in order to receive related federal funds. Previously, JJDPA only mandated 
the removal of minors from adult jails in delinquency cases. Minors prosecuted as adults 
were exempt from this requirement and could be housed in adult facilities. The 
reauthorization addresses the removal of all youth younger than age 18 who are pending 
trial or other court processes from facilities that house adult inmates. States were given 
until December 2021 to come into compliance with JJDPA or risk losing federal funding. 
 
The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) administers the 
Title II Juvenile Justice Delinquency Prevention Formula Grant, which, subject to the 
federal grant program and federal law, requires the removal of children from adult jails and 
lockups. GOCPP advises that current State practice is noncompliant, and implementation 
of the bill is necessary for compliance with federal formula grant funds standards. 
Exhibit 1 details federal fiscal 2023 and 2024 compliance standards and the State’s 
noncompliance monitoring rates. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 389/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
JJDPA Compliance Standards and Maryland’s Noncompliance Monitoring Rates 
Federal Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
Requirement 
Federal Standard 
(per 100,000 juveniles) 
Maryland’s 
Noncompliance 
Monitoring Rate 
(per 100,000 juveniles) 
 
2023 
2024 
2023 
2024 
Deinstitutionalization of status 
offenders and nonoffenders 
3.08 
3.23 
0.00 
0.15 
Removal of juveniles from 
adult jails and lockups 
n/a 
14.68 
93.26 
119.59 
Sight and sound separation 
0.66 
0.16 
0.00 
0.00 
Removal of juveniles, alleged 
delinquent, from adult jails 
and lockups 
8.81 
15.13 
0.66 
2.39 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
JJDPA:  Juvenile Justice Detention Prevention Act 
 
Source:  The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
 
If a state is noncompliant with JJDPA’s core requirements, the federal government reduces 
the state’s JJDPA grant funding by 20% per noncompliant requirement, and the State must 
reallocate 50% of its remaining award to compliance efforts. GOCPP notes that most 
violations of the “sight and sound” separation requirement occur as a result of youth placed 
in local adult jails and detention centers and recur every 30 days that a youth remains 
housed in an adult facility. 
 
According to GOCPP, Maryland was awarded $866,821 in 2024. The federal government 
has yet to reduce the State’s grant funding but plans to increase compliance enforcement 
efforts this year. Assuming continued steady funding, no changes to federal compliance 
standards and State performance, and a 20% funding cut absent the bill, the State avoids 
loss of approximately $173,000 in federal grant funding and restricted/reallocated use of 
approximately $347,000 in grant funding per year beginning as early as fiscal 2029 under 
the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 389/ Page 5 
Department of Juvenile Services 
 
DJS advises that implementation of the bill may require at least one new 24-bed facility. 
DJS advises that while significant, the cost of the facility cannot be reliably estimated at 
this time. However, for illustrative purposes only, in response to previous related 
legislation, DJS estimated the need for constructing two new 24-bed facilities, at a cost of 
$45 million each and annual operating expenditures of $12.0 to $15.0 million. DJS notes 
that it does not have readily available data to determine the amount of cases affected at the 
time the bill goes into effect, nor does it have data for the amount of juvenile cases currently 
under adult court jurisdiction. 
 
Although the bill has no effect on total capital spending, which is established annually by 
the Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process, funding for 
other capital projects is reduced or delayed. As noted above, to the extent facilities are 
constructed, general fund operational expenditures for DJS increase significantly. While 
the bill has an effective date of October 1, 2028, expenditures associated with new facilities 
are unlikely to be incurred within the five-year projection of this estimate. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Assuming that local jurisdictions do not have to alter facilities or 
significantly alter operations to comply with the bill, beginning in fiscal 2029, local 
expenditures decrease due to a reduced juvenile jail population. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2029, the bill shifts children from local jails to DJS facilities and 
imposes additional requirements on the conditions under which children are kept in local 
jails during the six hour temporary hold period permitted under the bill. As noted above, 
data is not readily available on the number of children held in local jails. According to 
GOCCP, most of the State’s sight and sound violations occur at local jails. Also, according 
to a workgroup of the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best 
Practices, “… counties have consistently reported that detaining youth in adult jails strains 
budgets, staffing, and infrastructure. Most facilities were not built to meet federal ‘sight 
and sound’ separation standards, and retrofitting would cost millions. These limitations 
increase the likelihood of compliance violations while placing youth at risk of harm.” 
 
The Maryland Association of Counties (MACo) advises that the bill relieves local jails of 
operational and fiscal burdens. According to MACo, local jurisdictions have employed 
extensive measures to comply with the sight and sound federal mandate for a limited 
juvenile population, altering facilities to achieve compliance has been impossible in some 
instances, and coordination efforts to avoid placements of juveniles in restrictive 
confinement have been complicated. 
 
Anne Arundel County advises that the bill may increase workload and overtime costs. 
Subsequent transportation requirements of a juvenile from a local detention facility to a 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 389/ Page 6 
DJS facility may require the arresting officer or detention staff to remain on site of where 
the juvenile was initially processed until transportation can be completed. 
Anne Arundel County also advises additional personnel may be required on site to the 
extent a juvenile undergoing processing is an escape risk or combative. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however similar provisions have been considered. For example, see HB 1107 
and SB 827 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 296 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and 
Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Commission on Juvenile Justice 
and Emerging Best Practices; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6