START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 307 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 307 
(Delegates Qi and Hill) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund - Alterations 
 
   
This bill requires the Comptroller to administer the Community Reinvestment and Repair 
Fund (CRRF) at the direction of the Office of Social Equity (OSE) and also requires the 
Comptroller, in consultation with OSE, to ensure compliance with statutory requirements 
governing CRRF. The bill also alters the purpose and authorized uses of CRRF and the 
requirements for county plans that must be submitted before counties receive and use 
CRRF funds.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $90,008 in FY 2027 for staff; future 
years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. As a result of this increase, cannabis sales 
and use tax revenues directed to OSE increase correspondingly to cover those costs, and 
the amount of sales and use tax revenue remaining for distribution to the general fund and 
various other special funds (in accordance with current law) decreases, as discussed below.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($45,000) 
($53,000) 
($61,000) 
($63,800) 
($66,600) 
SF Revenue 
$49,500 
$58,300 
$66,600 
$69,600 
$72,600 
SF Expenditure 
$58,500 
$68,900 
$72,100 
$75,400 
$78,700 
Net Effect 
($54,000) 
($63,600) 
($66,600) 
($69,600) 
($72,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 due to the 
redistribution of sales and use tax revenues, including direct allocations. Local government 
expenditures decrease correspondingly. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially 
affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 307/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Community Repair and Reinvestment Fund 
 
Under current law, the Comptroller administers CRRF. Under the bill, the Comptroller 
administers the fund at the direction of OSE.  
 
Under current law and the bill, the purpose of CRRF is to provide funds to 
community‑based organizations that serve communities determined by OSE (in 
consultation with the Office of the Attorney General) to have been the most impacted by 
disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022. The fund 
receives 35% of the sales and use tax revenues generated from the sale of adult-use 
cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. Under the bill, the purpose of the fund is 
expanded to also include serving specified findings of public interest.   
 
Under current law, funds from CRRF may only be used for (1) funding community‑based 
initiatives intended to benefit low-income communities; (2) funding community‑based 
initiatives that serve disproportionately impacted areas; and (3) related administrative 
expenses incurred by a local government in administering the funds that do not exceed 15% 
of the funds received in the fiscal year. The bill largely restates the same authorized uses 
under a new section of statute but specifies that CRRF must (as opposed to may) only be 
used for those purposes.  
 
Under current law and the bill, each county receives a distribution from CRRF in an 
amount that is proportionate to the total number of cannabis possession charges in the 
county during the period from July 1, 2002, to January 1, 2023, both inclusive, compared 
to the total number of cannabis possession charges in the State for that same period. For 
any distribution of funds to a county, the county must hold the funds separately from other 
revenue and general funds. Subject to the limitations regarding the authorized uses of 
CRRF, each county is required to adopt a law establishing the purpose for which money 
received from CRRF may be used.  
 
Under current law, OSE must also require each county to develop a plan for the distribution 
of CRRF funds to community-based organizations for use in accordance with statute. The 
plan must be (1) established before distributing funds; (2) developed in consultation with 
stakeholders; and (3) the subject of a public hearing before the plan is finalized. The bill 
provides additional specificity to what “stakeholder” means and also requires that the 
county plan be made publicly available. Additionally, under the bill, a county plan must 
(1) identify the geographic areas and populations within the county that have been 
determined to be most impacted by the disproportionate enforcement of cannabis laws and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 307/ Page 3 
(2) describe how the proposed uses of funds are consistent with authorized statutory uses. 
The bill also requires each county to consult with OSE to make any adjustments to a county 
plan.  
 
Under current law, by October 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, each county must submit 
a report to OSE regarding funds received from CRRF, the organizations that received 
funding from the county, the methods the county used to solicit, review, and select 
organizations eligible for funding, and administrative expenses related to the county’s 
administration and distribution of CRRF funds. The bill requires the report to also include 
data on populations served and services provided.  
 
The Office of Social Equity  
 
OSE, originally an independent office functioning within the Maryland Cannabis 
Administration (MCA), was redesignated as a unit within the Department of Social and 
Economic Mobility, which was established by Chapter 605 of 2025. OSE is responsible 
for promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated cannabis industry by 
people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on drugs 
in order to positively impact those communities. In this role, OSE is responsible for 
consulting with other agencies, providing recommendations to and working with MCA, 
assisting businesses to obtain financing through the Capital Access Program, and managing 
the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program (established to promote qualifying 
partnerships between operational licensees and social equity licensees).  
 
Under current law, OSE is also required to (1) with the assistance of the Comptroller, 
oversee CRRF; (2) oversee the appropriation of funds and the training of recipients of funds 
from CRRF; and (3) by October 1, 2025, adopt regulations to carry out the statutory 
provisions related to CRRF as modified by Chapter 195 of 2025; OSE has not yet 
promulgated the regulations. 
 
Under the bill, OSE’s role regarding oversight of CRRF is altered; OSE must instead direct 
the administration of CRRF.  
 
OSE is funded through distributions from sales and use tax collections from adult‑use 
cannabis sales. (See the Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and 
Revenues for a description of the current law distribution of cannabis sales and use tax 
revenues.) 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The Comptroller advises that any operational impact can be 
absorbed with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 307/ Page 4 
Administrative Costs for the Office of Social Equity  
 
Special fund expenditures for OSE increase by $90,008 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one program analyst/administrative manager to direct the administration of CRRF, consult 
with counties to make adjustments to county plans for the distribution of CRRF funding, 
and consult with the Comptroller to ensure compliance with statutory requirements 
governing the use of CRRF funds. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start‑up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below: 
 
 
OSE’s administrative workload related to county plans and oversight of CRRF 
significantly increased as a result of changes under Chapter 195, and the office did 
not receive additional staffing to handle those responsibilities (as was estimated to 
be needed in the fiscal and policy note for that legislation); and 
 
because OSE is already understaffed and the bill establishes new responsibilities, 
the office needs to hire one full‑time employee.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$80,867 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
FY 2027 OSE Administrative Costs 
$90,008 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Effect on the Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues  
 
Because the bill increases OSE expenditures, additional sales and use tax revenue will be 
needed to cover those costs. Therefore, the amount of sales and use tax revenue remaining 
for distribution to the general fund, various other special funds (including CRRF), and local 
governments decreases. See Exhibit 1 for resulting impacts on the distribution of cannabis 
sales and use tax revenues from increased OSE expenditures under the bill.  
 
Municipal revenues are also affected, as each county must distribute to a municipality 
located in the county 50% of the county’s allocation that is attributable to the cannabis 
sales and use tax revenue generated by a dispensary located in that municipality. 
 
CRRF expenditures (for the distribution of funds to counties, as required by current law) 
decrease correspondingly to the decrease in CRRF revenues beginning in fiscal 2027. 
County revenues decrease further as a result of the decreased distributions from CRRF 
beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Accordingly, county (and municipal) expenditures decrease correspondingly. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 307/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on Distribution of Sales and Use Tax Revenue  
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Funds Available for 
Distribution  
($90,008) 
($106,017) ($110,941) ($115,950) ($121,011) 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($45,004) 
($53,009) 
($61,018) 
($63,773) 
($66,556) 
CRRF 
(31,503) 
(37,106) 
(38,829) 
(40,583) 
(42,354) 
CPHF 
(4,500) 
(5,301) 
(5,547) 
(5,798) 
(6,051) 
CBAF 
(4,500) 
(5,301) 
0 
0 
0 
County Revenues 
(4,500) 
(5,301) 
(5,547) 
(5,798) 
(6,051) 
 
CBAF:  Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
CPHF:  Cannabis Public Health Fund 
CRRF:  Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
 
Notes:  The decrease in county revenues is in the aggregate. Numbers may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 217 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Comptroller’s 
Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 307/ Page 6 
Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and 
Revenues 
 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of 
adult‑use cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 
(Chapter 604) increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of 
adult‑use cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated 
approximately $71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and 
use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate 
went into effect, totaled $26.9 million; collections are on track to exceed $100.0 million in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the Department 
of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) Fund an amount sufficient to defray the 
operating and administrative costs of the Maryland Cannabis Administration and the Office 
of Social Equity, respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and 
DoSEM are then distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through 
fiscal 2028, after which the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (through fiscal 2033 only), which is 
administered by the Comptroller’s Office with oversight assistance from the Office of 
Social Equity; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund, which is administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (through 
fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the Department of Commerce; and 5% as a 
separate direct allocation to counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6