START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 303 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 303 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Handguns - Wear, Carry, and Transport Laws - Handbook Publication 
 
   
This bill requires the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), by October 1, 2026, and 
annually thereafter, to publish a handbook summarizing all State laws, federal laws, and 
case law that are applicable to the wearing, carrying, and transporting of a handgun in 
public in the State. OAG must draft the handbook (1) in plain language that can be easily 
understood without any special knowledge of the applicable State laws, federal laws, or 
case law and (2) in a format that can be easily used to teach a required firearm safety course. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  OAG can draft and publish the handbook each year using existing budgeted 
resources; thus, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Summary of Firearms Laws 
 
Chapter 651 of 2023 requires the Department of State Police to transmit a summary of each 
new law or change to each existing law pertaining to firearms that was passed by the 
General Assembly during each legislative session to each email address on file with the 
department that is associated with (1) the purchaser or transferee of a regulated firearm or 
(2) a person who has registered a regulated firearm with the department. The summary 
must be transmitted (1) within 45 days after the General Assembly adjourns Sine Die in a 
legislative session; (2) 30 days before the effective date of the act, for each act establishing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 303/ Page 2 
a new law or change to an existing law pertaining to firearms; and (3) as soon as practicable 
if an act is designated as an emergency act.  
 
Firearms Training Course for Handgun Permit Applicants 
 
A handgun permit applicant must successfully complete, prior to the application and each 
renewal, a firearms training course approved by the Secretary of State Police that includes 
(1) for an initial application, a minimum of 16 hours of instruction by a qualified handgun 
instructor, or 8 hours of instruction for a renewal application; (2) classroom instruction on 
State and federal firearm laws, home firearm safety, handgun mechanisms and operations, 
conflict de-escalation and resolution, anger management, and suicide prevention; and (3) a 
firearm qualification component that includes live-fire shooting exercise on a firing range 
and requires the applicant to demonstrate safe handling of a handgun and shooting 
proficiency with a handgun. 
 
An applicant for a permit is not required to complete a certified firearms training course if 
the applicant: 
 
 
is a law enforcement officer or a person who is retired in good standing from service 
with a law enforcement agency of the United States, the State, or any local law 
enforcement agency in the State; 
 
is a member, retired member, or honorably discharged member of the U.S. Armed 
Forces or the National Guard; 
 
is a qualified handgun instructor; or 
 
has completed a firearms training course approved by the Secretary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 501 and HB 1166 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2