START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 314 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 314 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Automation Technology Deployment Assessment and Displaced Employee 
Retraining Fund - Established 
 
 
This bill requires each covered employer to submit an annual report to the  
Secretary of Labor that includes the number of displaced employees if the employer has 
reduced its workforce by at least 10 employees while deploying automation technology 
that contributed to the reduction. The bill establishes the Displaced Employee Retraining 
Fund (DERF) to support training, job placement, and service programs, and requires each 
covered employer to pay an assessment of $900 to the fund for each displaced employee, 
unless the employer provides severance pay, certified retraining, or reemployment 
opportunities. The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) must enforce the bill, 
including assessing penalties for noncompliance. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No impact in FY 2027; general fund expenditures increase by $657,100 in 
FY 2028 for staffing and information technology (IT) costs. Out-years reflect inflation and 
termination of one-time costs. Special fund revenues increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in FY 2028, but a reliable estimate is not feasible as discussed below; special 
fund expenditures increase correspondingly beginning in FY 2029. Penalty provisions are 
not anticipated to materially affect general fund revenues, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$657,100 
$321,700 
$336,300 
$351,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
($657,100) 
($321,700) 
($336,300) 
($351,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.     
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 314/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:        
 
Definitions 
 
“Automation technology” means artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning systems, 
robotics, or other advanced technologies implemented with the primary purpose or 
substantial effect of replacing human labor.  
 
“Covered employer” means an employer that (1) employed 100 or more employees in the 
State in the preceding year and (2) reduced its workforce by at least 10 employees while 
deploying or using automation technology during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
 
“Displaced employee” means a former employee of a covered employer who was separated 
from employment due to the deployment or use of automation technology by the covered 
employer. 
 
Reporting of Displaced Employees 
 
By January 15 each year, beginning in 2028, a covered employer must submit a report to 
the Secretary of Labor with (1) the number of employees on the first and last days of the 
immediately preceding previous calendar year; (2) a description of automation 
technologies deployed or used; and (3) the number of displaced employees, excluding 
individuals separated from employment due to:   
 
 
voluntary attrition or retirement; 
 
a decline in revenue exceeding 20% that was not related to the deployment or use 
of automated technology; or 
 
the closure or relocation of an entire facility.  
 
The Secretary must adopt regulations specifying the information that must be included in 
the report. 
 
Displaced Employee Retraining Fund 
 
The bill establishes DERF to support retraining, for individuals separated from 
employment due to deployment or use of automation technology. The fund consists of 
revenues collected from the employers, money appropriated in the State budget, and any 
other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. DERF may be used 
only for supporting training, job placement, and service programs, and all expenditures 
from DERF must be supplemental to other similar funding available under current law. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 314/ Page 3 
Penalties  
 
A covered employer must pay $900, adjusted annually for inflation, to the Secretary for 
each displaced employee reported. This amount is reduced by 50% if the employer 
provides to a displaced employee (1) at least 12 weeks of severance pay; (2) certified 
retraining or redeployment opportunities; or (3) job placement with a Maryland business 
employing fewer than 50 employees. The Secretary must remit all payments to DERF. 
 
If a covered employer fails to report in a timely manner, the Secretary must assess a civil 
penalty of $250 for each day the report is late. If the employer fails to make the required 
payment, a penalty of $250,000 must be assessed. 
 
Current Law:  For additional information on the status of AI in the nation and State, please 
see the Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning   
 
The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning’s (DWDAL within 
MD Labor) Office of Workforce Development oversees dislocated worker services for the 
State. Current activities include collecting and processing reports related to mass layoffs 
under the federal Worker Adjustment Retraining Notifications (WARN) Act, the 
Economic Stabilization Act (ESA), and referring dislocated workers to appropriate 
workforce opportunities.  
 
Economic Stabilization Act  
 
The Economic Stabilization Act provides notice requirements and guidelines for employers 
facing a reduction in operations to assist in mitigating the effects on employees. The Act 
applies to any person, corporation, or other entity that employes at least 50 employees and 
has operated an industrial, commercial, or business enterprise in the State for at least one 
year. It does not include the State or its political subdivisions.  
 
Generally, an employer must provide written notice at least 60 days before initiating a 
reduction in operations to (1) all employees subject to the reduction; (2) each exclusive 
representative or bargaining agency that represents the employees; (3) individuals who 
work less than 20 hours on average each week or have worked for the employer for less 
than 6 months in the preceding 12 months; (4) DWDAL’s dislocated workers unit; and 
(5) the chief elected official of the political subdivision where the business is located, as 
specified. 
 
The notice must include (1) the name and address of the workplace where the reduction is 
expected to occur; (2) the name, telephone number, and email address of a company official 
to contact for further information; (3) a statement as to whether the reduction is expected 
to be permanent or temporary; and (4) the expected date when the reduction will begin. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 314/ Page 4 
However, notice is not required if the employer was actively seeking capital or additional 
business to prevent the layoffs and believed that providing notice would preclude the 
employer from obtaining necessary capital or business. In addition, notice is not required 
if the reduction in operations occurs due to any form of natural disaster. 
 
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
 
WARN, the federal counterpart to the State’s ESA program, requires employers with 
100 or more employees (generally not counting those who have worked less than 6 months 
in the last 12 months and those who work an average of fewer than 20 hours a week) to 
provide at least 60 calendar days advance written notice of a plant closing and mass layoff 
affecting 50 or more employees at a single site of employment. WARN makes certain 
exceptions to the requirements when layoffs occur due to unforeseeable business 
circumstances, faltering companies, and natural disasters. Employees entitled to notice 
under WARN include managers and supervisors, as well as hourly and salaried workers. 
WARN requires that notice also be given to employees’ representatives, the local chief 
elected official, and the state dislocated worker unit. 
 
Rapid Response 
 
Statute requires the State to establish a quick response program to provide both employers 
and employees with services to assist in mitigating the effects of reductions in operations. 
MD Labor must maintain the capacity to provide employment and training services through 
the quick response program, as specified.  
 
DWDAL’s Dislocated Services Unit (DSU) serves as Maryland’s designated state 
dislocated worker unit. DSU manages all notifications of employment dislocations, 
including federal WARN notices and State-level notifications. It provides administrative 
and fiscal oversight for the Rapid Response system, which is a proactive program designed 
to minimize the impact of economic disruptions caused by layoffs and plant or business 
operations closings.  
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2028 from payments 
to DERF by covered employers for each displaced employee. In the absence of experience 
under the bill, a reliable estimate is not feasible, but revenues may be significant. MD Labor 
estimates that 3,360 businesses in the State employ 100 or more individuals. For 
illustrative purposes only, if 10% of those businesses lay off the minimum of 
10 individuals, that results in 3,360 total displaced employees, yielding assessment of 
between $1,512,000 and $3,024,000 per year, depending on whether the covered 
employers pay the full assessment per employee or 50% if they provide the specified 
services.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 314/ Page 5 
The bill does not authorize the remittance of penalty payments for noncompliance to 
DERF, so it is assumed that any such penalties are paid to the general fund. This analysis 
assumes compliance with the bill’s reporting and payment requirements, so the bill’s 
penalty provisions are not expected to materially affect general fund revenues. However, 
as the penalty for noncompliance with the payment requirement is significant ($250,000), 
even a small number of penalty assessments can generate significant revenue. The 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill does not specify whether this penalty 
is assessed on a per-employee basis or if an employer must pay only one penalty regardless 
of the number of employees for whom payments are not made.  
 
State Expenditures:  As the reporting requirements do not begin for employers until 
January 15, 2028, and MD Labor needs adequate preparation time, this analysis anticipates 
costs associated with implementing the legislation beginning July 1, 2027. MD Labor 
anticipates requiring two new full-time positions and multiple part-time positions that, 
combined, total almost to the equivalent of another full-time position. Therefore, this 
analysis assumes that MD Labor requires three full-time positions. Finally, MD Labor 
advises that the bill requires that it upgrade its BEACON data system, used to track 
employment and layoffs for the Unemployment Insurance program, to track compliance 
with the bill. Although MD Labor was unable to obtain an estimate of the cost of such an 
upgrade, it estimates that it will cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. This analysis 
estimates a one-time cost of $300,000 to upgrade BEACON in fiscal 2028. As the bill does 
not authorize the use of DERF for administrative expenses, this analysis assumes that 
general funds are needed for staffing and IT expenses.   
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $657,122 in fiscal 2028, which accounts 
for the delayed implementation of the bill, as discussed above. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring three regular full-time positions to process reports, track compliance, manage 
special fund distributions, and handle penalty appeals. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$327,617 
One-time IT costs 
300,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    29,505 
Total FY 28 State Expenditures 
$657,122 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of one-time 
costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 314/ Page 6 
Special fund expenditures from DERF correspond to the revenues accrued due to 
assessments paid by covered employers. As those assessments begin in the second half of 
fiscal 2028, special fund expenditures are likely delayed to fiscal 2029. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 314/ Page 7 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 314/ Page 8 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human‑defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 314/ Page 9 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 314/ Page 10 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 10