START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 384 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 384 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Support - Capacity of Minors to Initiate and Defend an Action 
 
 
This bill authorizes a minor who is the parent of a child to initiate or defend an action for 
child support, whether pendente lite or permanently.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and federal fund expenditures for the Department of Human 
Services (DHS) increase by $1.2 million in FY 2027 only for one‑time programming costs, 
as discussed below. Federal fund matching revenues increase accordingly.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$797,100 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$377,600 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Expenditure 
$797,100 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($377,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not specifically prohibit (or authorize) the filing of an action 
for child support by a minor. 
 
Pursuant to Maryland Rule 2-202, an individual under disability to sue may sue by a 
guardian or other like fiduciary or, if none, by next of friend, subject to any order of court 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 384/ Page 2 
for the protection of the individual under disability. When a minor is in the sole custody of 
one of the minor’s parents, that parent has the exclusive right to sue on behalf of the minor 
for a period of one year following the accrual of the cause of action. If the custodial parent 
fails to institute suit within the one-year period, any person interested in the minor must 
have the right to institute suit on behalf of the minor as next friend upon first mailing notice 
to the last known address of the custodial parent. In a suit against an individual under 
disability, the guardian or other like fiduciary (if any) must defend the action. If there is no 
such guardian or fiduciary, the court must appoint an attorney to represent and defend the 
individual.  
 
State Expenditures:  State expenditures for DHS increase by an estimated $1,174,680 in 
fiscal 2027 only for one‐time programming updates. These expenditures are anticipated to 
be supported by $377,618 general funds/$797,062 federal funds, with federal fund 
matching revenues also increasing by $797,062.  
 
According to DHS, updates to the Child Support Management System (CSMS) and the 
Eligibility and Enrollment System are needed in order to (1) enable minors to apply for 
child support through CSMS; (2) limit potential enforcement actions at the discretion of 
CSA for minor parents who are not compliant with child support orders; and 
(3) appropriately calculate a minor parent’s income, based upon household receipt of 
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) and/or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP).  
 
Additional Comments:  According to DHS, it is unclear whether a minor custodial parent 
may receive government checks in the minor’s name and/or be subject to enforcement 
consequences by CSA. Under current practice, DHS advises that an adult assisting a minor 
parent in the initiation or defense of a child support action is responsible for the payment 
and subject to potential consequences when noncompliant. Assisting parents are ordered 
to be responsible by the court until the minor is at least age 18.  
 
Further, DHS advises that if a minor parent lives in a household already receiving TCA or 
SNAP benefits, the reported household income from child support would increase, 
potentially reducing or disqualifying the household from continuing to receive such 
benefits. (Any potential impact associated with the reduction of or disqualification for 
benefits has not been accounted for in this analysis.) 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 120 of 2025.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 384/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3