START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 478 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 478 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Classroom Supplies Purchased by 
Teachers - Alteration 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the income tax subtraction modification for educator 
expenses to full-time prekindergarten classroom teachers in prekindergarten programs in 
the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease by about $80,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s change with existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues may decrease by about $50,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2027. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An eligible teacher may subtract from income up to $250 of unreimbursed 
expenses paid or incurred during the tax year for the purchase of classroom supplies if the 
supplies are used by (1) students in the classroom or (2) the eligible teacher to prepare for 
or during classroom teaching. “Eligible teacher” is defined as an individual who is a 
kindergarten through grade 12 classroom teacher in an elementary or secondary school in 
the State on a full-time basis for an academic year ending during the tax year. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 478/ Page 2 
The subtraction modification is in addition to any federal income tax deduction claimed 
for unreimbursed educator expenses. Per § 62 of the Internal Revenue Code, an eligible 
educator may claim an “above-the-line” deduction (deducted from gross income in 
computing federal adjusted gross income) for certain expenses paid or incurred by the 
eligible educator during the tax year for professional development or in connection with 
books, supplies, computer or other equipment, or supplementary materials, subject to an 
inflation-adjusted dollar amount limit. For tax year 2026, the dollar amount limit is $350. 
“Eligible educator” is defined as an individual who is a kindergarten through  
grade 12 teacher, instructor, counselor, principal, or aide in a school for at least 900 hours 
during a school year.  
 
State/Local Revenues:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, general fund revenues may decrease by 
about $80,000 annually, and local income tax revenues may decrease by about 
$50,000 annually. This estimate is based on an analysis of historic claims for the educator 
expense subtraction modification and Maryland teacher employment statistics published 
by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 262 (Senator Simonaire) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2