START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 431 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 431 
(Delegate Behler) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Recordation and Printing of Subdivision Plats - Alterations 
 
 
This bill increases, from $5 per set to $25 per page, the fee for recording subdivision plats. 
The bill also updates various terms and makes clarifying changes in related statutory 
provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $13,800 in FY 2027 only for 
one‑time programming costs. General and special fund revenues increase annually, 
potentially significantly, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local government finances or 
operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, if a landowner in the State subdivides his/her land for 
commercial, industrial, or residential use, as specified, a plat of the subdivision must be 
recorded in the land records of the county where the land is located. If the landowner 
complies with the recordation requirements specified in the Real Property Article, the clerk 
of the court must generally accept and record the plat.  
 
The plat must be legible, accurately drawn to scale, and submitted for recordation, as 
further specified. The clerk must send a copy to the supervisor of assessments in the 
relevant county and one copy to the State Archivist, who must also record the plat. One half 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 431/ Page 2 
of the filing fee also must be sent to the State Archivist. The State Archivist must provide 
a copy of the plat to any supervisor of assessments of the State upon request. 
 
State Revenues:  The Judiciary reports that a typical set of plats consists of three copies 
of each page. The Judiciary also notes that half of the fee collected is credited to the general 
fund, while the other half is disbursed to MSA. Accordingly, if a plat is two pages, the fee 
to record the subdivision plat set increases from $5 under the existing fee schedule to 
$150 under the bill’s provisions. Of the $150 fee collected under this example, and based 
on existing fee distributions, $75 is directed to MSA as special fund revenues; the 
remaining portion is general funds. Absent additional data, this analysis is unable to 
accurately estimate the increase in fee revenues generated under the bill, however, they 
may be significant considering the extent of the fee increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland State Archives; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2