START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 450 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 450 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Protection of Identity of Victim of Sexual Assault or 
Stalking 
 
 
This bill prohibits, on notice that a case filing or record includes identifying information 
about a victim of sexual assault or stalking, the court or a party in a criminal or juvenile 
delinquency case from disclosing or allowing the inspection of electronic or paper filings 
or records to anyone other than the victim/victim’s representative unless all identifying 
information is redacted. The bill also includes a limited exception based on a court’s 
finding of good cause by clear and convincing evidence. Further, on written request of a 
victim of sexual assault or stalking, the court must redact identifying information relating 
to the victim from an existing file or record. “Victim of sexual assault” means an alleged 
victim of sexually assaultive behavior as defined by § 10-923 of the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article or a crime as specified by Title 3, Subtitle 11 (Human and Marriage 
Trafficking) of the Criminal Law Article. “Victim of stalking” means an alleged victim of 
stalking as defined by § 3-802 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $13,500 in FY 2027 
for one-time programming costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may have an operational impact on the circuit courts, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 11-301 of the Criminal Procedure Article provides certain 
protections from the release of an address or phone number of a victim or witness in a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 450/ Page 2 
criminal proceeding. Generally, on motion of the State or on request of a victim or witness, 
during a criminal trial or a juvenile delinquency adjudicatory hearing, a court may prohibit 
the release of the address or telephone number of the victim or witness unless the court 
determines that good cause is shown for the release of the information. 
 
Chapters 877 and 878 of 2024 expanded upon the protections within § 11-301 by 
prohibiting the court or a party in a criminal or juvenile delinquency case, on notice that an 
electronic or paper filing includes identifying information of a minor victim, from 
disclosing or allowing inspection of any such filing (including a charging document) to a 
nonparty unless the court or the party disclosing or allowing inspection of the filing redacts 
all identifying information within the filing or the court finds by clear and convincing 
evidence that there is good cause to order otherwise. 
 
“Identifying information” means the name of, and any other information that could 
reasonably be expected to identify, a minor victim. 
 
Pursuant to § 10-923 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, “sexually assaultive 
behavior” means an act that would constitute (1) a sexual crime under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of 
the Criminal Law Article; (2) sexual abuse of a minor under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law 
Article; (3) sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult under § 3-604 of the Criminal Law Article; 
(4) a violation of 18 U.S.C. Chapter 109A (sexual abuse); or (4) a violation of a law in 
another state, the United States, or a foreign country that is equivalent to any of these 
offenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 613 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 294 (Senator Love) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2