START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 400 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 400 
(Delegate Chang) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit - Conversion to Grant Program 
 
 
This bill converts the Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit (BIITC) to the 
Biotechnology Investment Incentive Grant Program within the Department of Commerce 
and makes various conforming changes. The bill repeals the BIITC Reserve Fund, 
establishes the Biotechnology Investment Incentive Grant Program Fund, and requires the 
Governor to include an appropriation of $10.0 million to the grant program fund in the 
annual budget bill. The bill also allows a subtraction modification against the income tax 
for the amount of a grant received under the bill to the extent such an amount is included 
in income for federal income tax purposes. Consistent with existing law, the program 
sunsets after fiscal 2028. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under the assumptions discussed below, overall State expenditures for 
biotechnology investment incentives are unaffected; however, general fund expenditures 
for incentives may increase in FY 2028. General fund expenditures may increase further 
in FY 2027 and/or 2028 for program administrative costs, as also discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028. 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Existing BIITC provisions as in effect before the bill’s July 1, 2026 
effective date continue to apply to tax credit certificates issued before the bill’s effective 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 400/ Page 2 
date. Commerce must disburse a grant to a qualified investor for which an initial grant 
eligibility certificate has been issued within 90 days of determining that the qualifying 
investment has been made. The bill makes various conforming changes to existing 
provisions relating to the recapture of program benefits under certain circumstances. 
 
Current Law:  The BIITC program offers a refundable State income tax credit to qualified 
investors that invest at least $25,000 in a qualified Maryland biotechnology company. 
“Qualified Maryland biotechnology company” is defined as a biotechnology company that 
has its headquarters and base of operations in the State; has fewer than 50 full‑time 
employees; has been in active business no longer than 12 years; is not publicly traded on 
any securities exchange; has been certified by Commerce; and the qualified investors in 
which have not received more than $7.0 million in tax credits in aggregate under the 
program. To be eligible for the tax credit, a qualified investor may not own or control more 
than 25% of the equity interests in the qualified Maryland biotechnology company after 
making the proposed investment.  
 
The tax credit is generally equal to 33% of the qualified investment, up to $250,000. 
Investments in qualified Maryland biotechnology companies located in Allegany, 
Dorchester, Garrett, or Somerset counties or in a Regional Institution Strategic Enterprise 
Zone (subject to certain requirements) are eligible for an enhanced credit equal to 50% of 
the qualified investment, up to $500,000. Qualified opportunity funds that invest in 
qualified companies located in an opportunity zone are also eligible for certain enhanced 
credits for tax years 2019 through 2026.  
 
Commerce administers the tax credit application, approval, and certification process. Tax 
credit awards are subject to annual appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund; Commerce 
may not certify eligibility for tax credits for investments in a single qualified company that 
exceed 10% of the total appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund for the fiscal year. The 
Comptroller must transfer the amount of certified credits from the reserve fund to the 
general fund on a quarterly basis. The BIITC program statute specifies that the Governor 
must include an annual appropriation to the reserve fund but does not specify a required 
funding level. Commerce may not issue any tax credit certificates under the BIITC program 
after fiscal 2028. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Biotechnology Investment Incentive Grant Program Fund  
 
As noted above, the bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $10.0 million to the grant program fund – the successor to the newly 
repealed BIITC Reserve Fund. Existing statute requires the Governor to include an annual 
appropriation to the reserve fund but does not specify a required funding amount. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 400/ Page 3 
Consistent with historic funding levels, the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a 
$12.0 million appropriation to the reserve fund, including $4.7 million in general funds and 
$7.3 million in special funds (reflecting the anticipated unused fund balance to be carried 
over from fiscal 2026). 
 
This analysis assumes that the Governor continues to fund the newly converted program at 
a level consistent with historic appropriations to the BIITC Reserve Fund and, thus, overall 
general and special fund expenditures for biotechnology investment incentives are 
unaffected. However, to the extent the bill’s changes increase demand for biotechnology 
investment incentives, general fund expenditures may increase in fiscal 2028 to maintain 
the historic funding level (or meet the minimum required $10.0 million appropriation) as 
fewer unused funds are available to be carried over from fiscal 2027. Any such effect 
cannot be reliably predicted.  
 
Though not clearly specified in the bill, this analysis also assumes that annual 
appropriations to the grant program fund are no longer required after fiscal 2028, following 
the termination of the program.  
 
Commerce Administrative Expenses  
 
The BIITC program is currently administered by two full-time tax specialists. Commerce 
advises that, though the bill does not substantively alter program eligibility or certification 
requirements, the conversion of the existing tax credit program to a grant program changes 
and increases the administrative demands of the program on Commerce such that a regular 
full-time grants associate is needed. However, the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) notes that any additional workload generated by the bill is temporary, given the 
program’s June 30, 2028 sunset date. Accordingly, DLS assumes that any temporary 
increase in grant administration duties resulting from the bill can likely be handled with 
existing budgeted resources. However, to the extent additional personnel support is 
required, general fund expenditures for Commerce may increase by about $68,000 in 
fiscal 2027 (assuming a 90-day start-up delay) and $77,000 in fiscal 2028 to hire 
one temporary contractual grants associate.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 247 (Senator Beidle) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 400/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4