START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 488 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 488 
(Delegate Wilson, et al.) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
Rules 
 
Election Districts - General Assembly and Representatives in Congress 
 
 
This emergency bill alters the boundaries of the State’s eight congressional districts for the 
2026 election of members of the U.S. House of Representatives. The bill also proposes a 
constitutional amendment to (1) establish that specified provisions of the State Constitution 
regarding legislative districts apply explicitly for the election of a member of the Senate 
and members of the House of Delegates and (2) establish that the General Assembly has 
the power to grant original jurisdiction to the Supreme Court of Maryland to review the 
congressional districting of the State. The bill also proposes a temporary constitutional 
amendment to establish the boundaries of the eight congressional districts for the State 
proposed by the bill in the State constitution for statewide elections that occur between 
2026 and the effective date of legislation establishing districts for the election of the State’s 
representatives in Congress following the 2030 decennial census. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase significantly for FY 2026, potentially by 
more than $3.0 million, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The operations of local boards of elections are likely to be significantly 
affected, and expenditures for local boards of elections increase in FY 2026 and potentially 
in FY 2027 due to overtime and other costs, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 488/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Congressional district boundaries must be redrawn every 10 years 
following the decennial census to adjust for population changes. Congressional districts 
must comply with the U.S. Constitution and the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has held that congressional districts are subject to a strict population 
equality standard under Article I, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. Accordingly, the 
populations of congressional districts must be as close to mathematical equality as 
practicable. 
 
Chapters 66 and 67 of 2010 require that population counts used to create the State’s 
congressional district plan exclude individuals incarcerated in State or federal correctional 
facilities, as determined by the decennial census, who were not State residents prior to their 
incarceration. Individuals incarcerated in State or federal correctional facilities who were 
residents of the State prior to their incarceration must be counted at their last known 
residence. 
 
The State’s current congressional districting plan was enacted as Chapter 16 of 2022. The 
enacted congressional district map can be found here. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  Early voting for the 2026 State primary election begins 
June 11, 2026, and continues through June 18, 2026. The State primary election is 
June 23, 2026, and the State general election is November 3, 2026. Ballots for the primary 
election must be finalized 64 days before the election (April 20). As such, the State Board 
of Elections (SBE) and local boards of elections must implement the new congressional 
districting plan, as established under the bill, within a significantly compressed timeframe. 
 
SBE advises that in order to meet this deadline it requires an estimated $3.5 million in 
fiscal 2026 to (1) print and mail new voter identification cards to affected voters; 
(2) procure mapping software services to identify the precincts affected by the change in 
congressional district boundaries; (3) hire temporary staff to assist local boards of elections 
with changes related to redistricting; (4) potentially locate and prepare new polling places 
for redrawn precincts and hire new election judges to staff those locations; (5) procure 
additional provisional ballot applications; and (6) conduct a public outreach and media 
campaign to alert the public to the changes in voter registrations. The Department of 
Legislative Services cannot independently verify SBE’s estimate; however, significant 
funding is likely needed. Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by at least 
$3.0 million in fiscal 2026 for SBE to conduct the aforementioned activities and implement 
the congressional district boundaries established under the bill in time for the June 2026 
primary. Some expenses for the general election may carry over into fiscal 2027 as well. It 
is also assumed that SBE can handle future elections with resources that are normally 
budgeted following a decennial census for redistricting and related costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 488/ Page 3 
Associated preliminary implementation work by local boards of elections for both the 
primary and general elections can each take up to several weeks, likely resulting in 
increased expenditures for the local boards, but a reliable estimate is not feasible at this 
time. For illustrative purposes only, SBE estimates total costs for each large county, 
including Montgomery and Baltimore counties, to be approximately $300,000 to 
implement provisions of the bill in time for the June 2026 primary. These costs include 
overtime for local board of elections staff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - January 26, 2026 
Third Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
Revised - Updated Information - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3