START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 417 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 417 
(Delegates Pippy and Kerr) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Medetomidine and Xylazine Consumer Protection Act 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “retailer” from distributing or selling a “medetomidine product” or a 
“xylazine product” unless the purchaser provides proof of intent to use the product for 
institutional, veterinary, or scientific purposes. A retailer may not distribute, sell, or expose 
for sale a medetomidine or xylazine product to an individual younger than 21. A retailer 
that distributes, sells, or exposes for sale medetomidine or xylazine products must maintain 
records of all sales, including a copy of (1) the identification used as the purchaser’s proof 
of age and (2) each document or other material used as proof of the purchaser’s intended 
use. A retailer that violates any of the bill’s prohibitions is subject to a civil penalty of  
up to $3,000 for a first violation and $6,500 for each subsequent violation. Civil penalties 
must be deposited in the Maryland Substance Abuse Fund. The Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on general fund expenditures for enforcement depends on the 
regulations adopted. Special fund revenues to the Maryland Substance Abuse Fund may 
increase beginning as early as FY 2027 if civil penalties are assessed; however, civil 
penalties are not likely to have a material impact on State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The revenue from civil penalty provisions of the bill is not anticipated to 
have a material impact on local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Medetomidine product” means a product containing any amount of 
medetomidine. “Xylazine product” means a product containing any amount of xylazine. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 417/ Page 2 
“Retailer” means a person that (1) sells, prepares, or maintains medetomidine products or 
xylazine products or (2) advertises, represents, or holds itself out as selling, preparing, or 
maintaining medetomidine products and xylazine products. This includes a manufacturer, 
wholesaler, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm, online platform, or 
any other business entity doing business within the State. 
 
Current Law:  The State does not currently regulate medetomidine or xylazine. However, 
Chapters 249 and 748 of 2024 put restrictions and penalties on the labeling, advertising, 
and selling of tianeptine and kratom, respectively, for consumer protection. 
 
Under federal law (21 CFR § 522.1335 and 21 CFR § 522.2662), medetomidine and 
xylazine are only for use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian. Xylazine may also 
not be used on animals that produce domestic food. 
 
The Maryland Substance Abuse Fund must be used by the Behavioral Health 
Administration for the following purposes in order of priority:  (1) planning expenses and 
related costs incurred by local drug and alcohol councils; (2) planning expenses and related 
costs incurred by any State unit designated to coordinate planning by local drug and alcohol 
councils and review grant requests from local governments; and (3) substance abuse 
evaluation and treatment services, including services provided through a drug treatment 
court. Administrative expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with 
the State budget. Disbursements from the fund must supplement, and may not substitute 
for, any other funds appropriated for substance abuse evaluation and treatment services. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that the bill would require them to hire one full-time 
coordinator of special programs to monitor compliance with the bill, and one part-time 
health policy analyst to provide administrative assistance. Under these assumptions, MDH 
general fund expenditures would increase by $142,530 beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
However, MDH’s responsibilities under the bill are contingent upon the enforcement 
mechanisms adopted through regulations. Until regulations have been adopted, it is unclear 
whether MDH needs additional resources to enforce the bill’s documentation requirements. 
This analysis assumes MDH adopts an enforcement mechanism that may be handled with 
existing resources. (More robust enforcement could necessitate additional staffing, but any 
such impact would be a result of regulations.)  
 
Further, this analysis assumes compliance by retailers, particularly given federal law that 
limits use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian. Under the bill, MDH must remit 
civil penalties to the Maryland Substance Abuse Fund. Assuming retailers comply with the 
bill, the civil penalty provisions are not anticipated to generate a significant increase in 
State revenues. To the extent civil penalties are collected and remitted, special fund 
revenues to the Maryland Substance Abuse Fund increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 417/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Although the bill establishes restrictions, it does not prohibit the 
sale of medetomidine or xylazine products. Even so, small business retailers that prepare, 
distribute, sell, or expose for sale a medetomidine or xylazine product must comply with 
the bill’s proof of age and intended use, documentation, and maintenance of records 
requirements. Moreover, they may be subject to civil penalty provisions for 
noncompliance. 
 
Additional Comments:  Medetomidine is a veterinary anesthetic drug often used on dogs 
and not approved for human use. Its effects are similar to those of xylazine. In August 2024, 
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that medetomidine is being 
detected as an adulterant in illicit drugs, overdoses, and drug paraphernalia. It is often 
detected alongside fentanyl in patients who overdosed on street drugs. While the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has only approved medetomidine for veterinary use, 
another form of it called dexmedetomidine is approved for use as a sedative on humans. 
 
Xylazine is a veterinary tranquilizer and pain reliever that has also been detected alongside 
fentanyl in illicit drugs. It has been FDA-approved for use in veterinary medicine, but not 
humans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1109 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 435 (Senator Folden) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Comptroller’s 
Office; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3