START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 486 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 486 
(Delegate Fennell) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day and Maryland School 
Pedestrian Awareness Day - Establishment 
 
   
This bill designates November 14 each year as “Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day” to 
commemorate Ruby Bridges who, on November 14, 1960, became the first 
African American 
student 
to 
integrate 
an 
all-White 
elementary 
school 
in  
New Orleans, Louisiana. The bill also designates the second Wednesday in October each 
year as “Maryland School Pedestrian Awareness Day” to encourage local school systems, 
in collaboration with the county or municipality, to promote safe pedestrian routes to and 
from schools. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must make resource 
materials publicly available to assist local school systems in planning each designated 
observance day, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can make resources publicly available for the programs using existing 
resources; however, resources may be temporarily diverted from current priorities. 
  
Local Effect:  None. However, local school systems may choose to implement a program 
of education based on the resources made available by MSDE. Any impact is at the 
discretion of local school systems. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day resource materials provided by 
MSDE may include instructional materials, including those specified, and must include 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 486/ Page 2 
resources to assist teachers to engage in discussions about civil rights and social justice. 
The Maryland School Pedestrian Awareness Day resource materials provided by MSDE 
may include materials on specified topics. 
 
Current Law:  The public schools must devote a part of the day to appropriate exercises 
for the following days:  Washington’s Birthday; Lincoln’s Birthday; Veterans’ Day; 
Columbus Day; Arbor Day; Black History Month with an emphasis on Harriet Tubman 
and Frederick Douglass and the contributions they made in the fight against slavery; and 
any other day of national significance. 
 
The Maryland Standards and Frameworks in Social Studies provides students with several 
age-appropriate opportunities to learn about Ruby Bridges and civil rights, including those 
for grade 5 social studies, middle school U.S. history, and high school U.S. history and 
U.S. Government. State Frameworks are defined as supporting documents and provide 
guidance for implementing the State Standards in Social Studies, which are reviewed and 
adopted by the Maryland State Board of Education every eight years.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1003 and HB 493 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 526 (Senator A. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico 
County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2