START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 409 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 409 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Juvenile Court - Jurisdiction (Youth Charging Reform Act) 
 
 
This bill expands the jurisdiction of the juvenile court by repealing and altering existing 
statutory exceptions to the juvenile court’s exclusive original jurisdiction. However, the 
bill establishes that the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over a child at least 
age 16 who is alleged to have committed any crime punishable by life imprisonment. The 
bill makes conforming changes and a correction to statutory cross references. The bill 
applies only prospectively and does not apply to any criminal prosecution or delinquency 
proceeding for any act committed before the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant cost savings for the Department of Juvenile Services 
(DJS) in FY 2027 from operational efficiencies, which may be offset (to an unknown 
degree) by an increase in the DJS population and services, as discussed below. General 
fund expenditures for the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) decrease by as much as 
$1.4 million in FY 2027, as discussed below. Potential reduced expenditures for the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). The Judiciary can 
implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  General fund expenditures for the State’s Attorneys’ offices increase 
potentially significantly, as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the following exclusions from the juvenile court’s 
jurisdiction:  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 409/ Page 2 
 
a child at least age 14 alleged to have committed an act that, if committed by an 
adult, would be a crime punishable by life imprisonment; 
 
a child at least age 16 and alleged to have committed abduction, kidnapping, robbery 
under § 3-403 of the Criminal Law Article, third-degree sexual offense under  
3-307(a)(1) of the Criminal Law Article, first-degree assault under § 3-202 of the 
Criminal Law Article, or attempted robbery under § 3-403 of the Criminal Law 
Article; 
 
a child at least age 16 and alleged to have committed a crime in violation of § 5-133 
(possession of a regulated firearm), § 5-134 (sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated 
firearm), § 5-138 (sale, transfer, or disposal of a stolen regulated firearm), or  
§ 5-203 (possession of a short-barreled rifle or short-barreled shotgun) of the 
Public Safety Article; or 
 
a child at least age 16 and alleged to have committed a crime in violation of  
§ 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun), § 4‑404 (use of a machine 
gun in a crime of violence), § 4‑405 (use of a machine gun for an aggressive 
purpose), § 5‑621 (firearm in connection to a drug trafficking crime), or  
§ 5‑622 (possession of firearm after conviction) of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
The bill makes conforming changes to various statutory cross references and corrects and 
conforms a cross reference regarding offenses that must be reported to schools. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Juvenile Court Jurisdiction 
 
In general, the juvenile court has jurisdiction over children who are alleged to be 
delinquent, in need of supervision (CINS), or who have received a citation for specified 
violations. The juvenile court also has jurisdiction over peace order proceedings in which 
the respondent is a child. 
 
The juvenile court has jurisdiction over a child who is at least age 10 and is alleged to have 
committed an act that would, if committed by an adult, be (1) a “crime of violence ” (as 
defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article); (2) specified crimes involving handguns 
and firearms; (3) aggravated cruelty to animals; or (4) third-degree sexual offense. Outside 
of these circumstances, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over a child younger 
than age 13 for purposes of a delinquency proceeding, and such a child may not be charged 
with a crime. A child of any age may be adjudicated a CINS and subject to the juvenile 
court’s jurisdiction under applicable provisions. 
 
The juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over (1) a child at least age 14 alleged to have 
committed an act which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime punishable by life 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 409/ Page 3 
imprisonment; (2) a child at least age 16 alleged to have violated specified traffic or boating 
laws; (3) a child at least age 16 alleged to have committed specified crimes (violent crimes, 
firearms crimes, etc.,); or (4) a child who previously has been convicted as an adult of a 
felony and is subsequently alleged to have committed an act that would be a felony if 
committed by an adult. These cases are tried in adult criminal court. 
 
Transfers of Jurisdiction 
 
However, for items (1), (3), and (4) above, the adult criminal court may transfer the case 
back to juvenile court before trial or before a plea is entered if the court determines from a 
preponderance of the evidence that transfer is in the interest of the child or society and 
specified conditions are met. This is often referred to as “reverse waiver.” A reverse waiver 
is not permitted in certain circumstances, such as when the child was previously convicted 
in an unrelated case excluded from the jurisdiction of the juvenile court or when the alleged 
crime is murder in the first degree and the accused child was at least age 16 when the 
alleged crime was committed. 
 
The juvenile court may waive its jurisdiction (which transfers the case to adult court) with 
respect to a petition alleging delinquency if the petition concerns a child who is at least 
age 15 or a child who is charged with committing an act which, if committed by an adult, 
would be punishable by life imprisonment. The court may waive its jurisdiction only after 
it has conducted a waiver hearing held prior to the adjudicatory hearing and after notice 
has been given to all parties. The court may not waive its jurisdiction over a case unless it 
determines, from a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, that the child 
is an unfit subject for juvenile rehabilitative measures. 
 
The juvenile court must consider the following criteria when making a waiver 
determination:  (1) the child’s age; (2) the mental and physical condition of the child; 
(3) the child’s amenability to any available treatment; (4) the nature of the offense and the 
child’s alleged participation in it; and (5) public safety. These criteria must be considered 
individually and in relation to each other on the record. 
 
Statutory provisions also authorize a court exercising criminal jurisdiction to transfer the 
child to the juvenile court at sentencing if (1) as a result of trial or a plea, all charges under 
specified provisions that excluded jurisdiction from the juvenile court do not result in a 
finding of guilty and (2) pretrial transfer of the case was prohibited under specified statutes 
or the court did not transfer jurisdiction after a reverse waiver hearing. In determining 
whether to transfer jurisdiction at sentencing, the court must consider (1) the child’s age; 
(2) the mental and physical condition of the child; (3) the child’s amenability to any 
available treatment; (4) the nature of the child’s acts as proven in the trial or admitted to in 
a plea; and (5) public safety. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 409/ Page 4 
Juvenile Court Dispositions 
 
Generally, a disposition hearing is held by the juvenile court to determine whether a child 
who has been adjudicated delinquent needs or requires the court’s guidance, treatment, or 
rehabilitation and, if so, the nature of the guidance, treatment, or rehabilitation. Among 
other options, and subject to specified limitations, a juvenile court may:   
 
 
place the child on probation or under supervision in the child’s own home or in the 
custody or under the guardianship of a relative or other fit person, on terms the court 
deems appropriate, including community detention; 
 
commit the child to the custody or guardianship of DJS or other agency on terms 
that the court considers appropriate, including designation of the type of facility 
where the child is to be accommodated; or 
 
order the child or the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian to participate in 
rehabilitative services that are in the best interest of the child and the family. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Department of Juvenile Services 
 
General fund expenditures for DJS decrease, potentially significantly, due to realized 
operational efficiencies under the bill. According to DJS, in fiscal 2025, 417 youth were 
held in DJS detention facilities while awaiting transfer hearings in the adult court system. 
During that same time, 614 youth who were charged as adults ultimately had their cases 
transferred to juvenile court (whether or not they were detained during that year).  
In 2025, DJS reported that up to 68% of its pre-disposition population is youth charged as 
adults, whose length of stay averages 147 days. Comparatively, youth charged in the 
juvenile court held in pre-disposition facilities stay on average for 27 days. Consequently, 
DJS anticipates processing cases and providing services at a faster rate to its youth 
population; any associated cost savings due to operational efficiencies may be offset (to an 
unknown degree) by an increased DJS population and increased demand for DJS services.   
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
Based on information submitted for similar legislation introduced last year, general fund 
expenditures for OPD contractual services for psychologists may decrease by as much as 
$1.4 million in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, 
and by as much as $1.85 million each year thereafter. OPD utilizes contractual 
psychologists to evaluate the current developmental capacity of children in the adult 
criminal court. In fiscal 2024 (the last year readily available), OPD represented 618 youth 
in transfer hearings and anticipates a 75% reduction in these hearings under the bill. 
However, it is unclear if OPD utilizes these services for hearings to waive cases from the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 409/ Page 5 
juvenile court to the adult court. Should that occur, OPD experiences cost savings below 
this estimate. Any such impact depends on waiver requests by prosecutors in response to 
the bill, which cannot be reliably determined at this time.  
 
OPD further advises that the bill’s reduction in the workload associated with hearings to 
transfer children from the adult criminal court to the juvenile court could further reduce 
expenditures equivalent to the costs associated with 31 positions (22 attorneys, 4.5 social 
workers, and 4.5 administrative personnel). However, this estimate assumes that these 
positions will be reassigned to other OPD units, which will allow OPD to meet caseload 
standards or mitigate the need for future additional OPD personnel. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures for the DPSCS decrease if the bill results in fewer youth being 
sentenced to DPSCS facilities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association (MSAA) advises the 
bill significantly increases workloads for juvenile cases, which often include increased 
filings and shortened timelines. Accordingly, the following localities have reported the 
need for 59 total additional personnel to implement the bill, broken down by the following: 
 
County 
Personnel 
Anne Arundel 
4 employees (1 assistant state’s attorney; 0.5 case manager; 0.5 victim/witness 
advocate; 1 investigator; 1 body camera worn paralegal) 
Baltimore City 
16 employees (11 assistant state’s attorneys; 5 support staff) 
Baltimore County 
6 employees (3 assistant state’s attorneys; 2 paralegals; 1 administrative aide) 
Carroll 
3 employees (1 assistant state’s attorney; 1 assistant; 1 witness coordinator) 
Frederick 
3 employees (1 assistant state’s attorney; 1 investigator; 1 administrative aide) 
Howard 
5 employees (2 assistant state’s attorneys; 3 paralegals) 
Montgomery 
9 employees (4 assistant state’s attorneys; 4 legal assistants; 1 technology 
specialist) 
Prince George’s 
13 employees (4 assistant state’s attorneys; 3 administrative aides; 2 victim/witness 
coordinators; 2 paralegals; 2 investigators) 
 
While acknowledging the general potential for a significant fiscal impact, the Department 
of Legislative Services is unable to validate the magnitude of the estimates provided by 
MSAA at this time. MSAA did not provide data to support its estimated need for personnel 
under the bill.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 409/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 422 and HB 1433 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 323 (Senator Smith, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6