START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 483 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 483 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Charitable Organizations - Audit and Review Thresholds 
 
 
This bill increases the minimum gross income amounts from charitable contributions above 
which a charitable organization must include a certain audit or review with a registration 
statement. The bill increases the threshold for an audit from $750,000 to $1,000,000 and 
for a review from $300,000 to $500,000. The bill further authorizes the Secretary of State 
(SOS) to accept certain documentation in place of an audit or review in connection with a 
charitable organization’s registration statement, if the charitable contributions do not 
exceed $500,000 (up from $300,000) and amount to 20% or less of the total gross income. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any costs associated with updating online filing systems and otherwise 
implementing the bill are minimal and can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. Charitable organizations are not considered small 
businesses. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “charitable contribution” is a contribution made on a representation that 
it will be used for a charitable purpose. A charitable contribution includes the payment, 
transfer, or enforceable pledge of financial help, including money, credit, property, or 
services. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 483/ Page 2 
However, a charitable contribution does not include:   
 
 
an unsolicited gift; 
 
a government grant or government money; 
 
membership assessments, dues, or fines; 
 
a payment for property sold (or services rendered) by a charitable organization – 
unless the property is sold or the services rendered in connection with a charitable 
solicitation; 
 
a public safety contribution (i.e., a contribution made on a representation that it will 
be used for the purposes of a public safety organization); and 
 
an authorization for a discount on the use of services or materials, equipment, or 
facilities, including those relating to advertising and broadcast airtime. 
 
SOS registers and oversees charitable organizations in the State and maintains an online 
database of registered entities. 
 
A charitable organization is a person that:   
 
 
is or holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, eleemosynary, humane, 
patriotic, philanthropic, or religious organization; and 
 
either (1) solicits or receives charitable contributions from the public or (2) is an 
ambulance, firefighting, fraternal, rescue, or police or other law enforcement 
organization when it solicits charitable contributions from the public. 
 
A charitable organization must register and receive a registration letter from SOS before it  
(1) solicits charitable contributions in the State; (2) has charitable contributions solicited 
on its behalf in the State; or (3) solicits charitable contributions outside the State if the 
organization is in the State. 
 
A registered charitable organization must submit an annual report to SOS, as specified. 
SOS may exempt an organization from registration and reporting requirements if the 
charitable organization (1) is organized under the laws of another state that has a statute 
similar to Maryland’s; (2) has been exempted from the submission of a registration 
statement by the other state; (3) has a principal place of business outside the State; and 
(4) gets its money principally from sources outside the State. 
 
Auditing Requirements:  In addition to other information and materials necessary to 
complete the registration statement, charitable organizations must submit an audit by a 
certified public accountant (CPA) if the gross income from contributions in the most recent 
fiscal year is at least $750,000, or a review by an independent CPA if the gross income 
from contributions from the last fiscal year is at least $300,000 but less than $750,000. SOS 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 483/ Page 3 
may accept other documentation in place of either the audit or the review under specified 
conditions but may also require an audit or review if the amount of gross income is less 
than $750,000. SOS retains the authority to require an audit or review under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 354 (Senators Kagan and Waldstreicher) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3