START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 480 
(Delegate Fennell, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Transportation Network Companies - Deactivation of Operators 
 
 
This bill requires a transportation network company (TNC) to maintain and apply a written 
deactivation policy, as specified, that provides the policies and procedures for the 
deactivation of transportation network operators, including an internal appeal procedure. 
An operator may file a complaint with the Public Service Commission (PSC) or bring a 
civil action for a violation of the deactivation appeal requirements. PSC is authorized and 
required to adopt regulations and take other related actions, as specified. The bill also alters 
and establishes related definitions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $476,300 in FY 2027. 
Future years reflect annualization and the elimination of one-time costs. Special fund 
revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service 
companies. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations due 
to any civil actions heard in the District Court. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$476,300 
$445,200 
$465,400 
$486,000 
$506,800 
SF Expenditure 
$476,300 
$445,200 
$465,400 
$486,000 
$506,800 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Appeals of PSC decisions are heard in the circuit courts; however, the bill 
is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 480/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Modified Definitions 
 
The definition of “transportation network company” is modified to mean an organization, 
including a corporation, partnership, or sole proprietor, that uses an online-enabled 
application, platform, or digital dispatch system to:   
 
 
connect passengers and customers with transportation network drivers; 
 
present offers to transportation network drivers through a digital labor platform; or 
 
facilitate the provision of transportation services for compensation by transportation 
network drivers. 
 
The definition of “transportation network operator,” “transportation network partner,” or 
“transportation network driver” is modified to mean an individual who: 
 
 
has been issued a transportation network operator’s license, or is otherwise 
authorized, by PSC to provide transportation network services; 
 
provides transportation to passengers or customers (1) through a TNC’s platform 
and (2) between points chosen by the passenger or customer in exchange for 
payment of a fee to the TNC and for the operator’s service made through or by the 
TNC; and 
 
uses a motor vehicle that is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the 
individual and is approved by PSC and the TNC for use in providing transportation 
network services. 
 
Written Deactivation Policy Required 
 
A TNC must maintain a written policy that provides the policies and procedures for the 
deactivation of operators and make the policy and any updates or changes available, as 
specified. The deactivation policy must be (1) specific enough for an operator to understand 
what constitutes a violation of the policy and how to avoid violating the policy and 
(2) be reasonably related to the safe and efficient operation of the TNC. 
 
“Deactivate” or “deactivation” means an action by a TNC that restricts an operator’s access 
to the company’s digital network for 48 hours or more. It includes (1) blocking an 
operator’s access to a digital network; (2) suspending an operator; and (3) changing an 
operator’s status from eligible to ineligible to provide transportation network services for 
48 hours or more. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 480/ Page 3 
The deactivation policy may not include a policy that would result in a deactivation based 
on specified circumstances, including (1) an operator’s availability to work, including the 
number of hours the operator is available to work; (2) a quantitative metric derived from 
aggregate customer ratings of an operator’s performance; and (3) except in the case of 
egregious misconduct (as defined) or where deactivation is otherwise required by law, the 
results of a background check, consumer report, driving record, or record of traffic 
violations. PSC may adopt related regulations, as specified. 
 
Generally, a TNC may not deactivate an operator (1) for an unwarranted reason or a reason 
that is inconsistent with the company’s deactivation policy or (2) if the deactivation is 
intended to or results in discrimination or a discriminatory act. A TNC must apply the 
deactivation policy and penalties for violating the policy in a consistent manner. The 
penalty of deactivation must be reasonably related to a violation of the deactivation policy 
and consider mitigating circumstances. 
 
Procedures for Deactivation 
 
Generally before deactivating an operator, a TNC must conduct a fair and objective 
investigation and demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged violation 
occurred, subject to specified requirements. However, a TNC may immediately deactivate 
an operator if (1) the deactivation is required to comply with any applicable court order or 
State, local, or federal law or regulation or (2) subject to additional specified processes, the 
operator has clearly engaged in egregious misconduct. 
 
Except in the case of egregious misconduct, a TNC must provide an operator with at least 
14 days advance notice of an impending deactivation. The bill specifies what must be 
included in the written notice, including the reason for the deactivation, records and 
evidence relied upon, the operator’s right to appeal and the TNC’s process for appealing, 
and information on how to contact an operator advocacy organization, as defined, or other 
entity that may be able to assist the operator. PSC must designate the form and manner of 
delivery of the notice and may create and distribute a model notice, as specified. 
 
Unless otherwise provided by local, State, or federal law, a TNC must provide the operator 
with the records relied on to confirm or substantiate a violation of the deactivation policy. 
The bill specifies what the records must include, processes for providing updated records, 
requirements for redactions, reasons that records may be summarized, and requirements 
for record retention. Failure to disclose records creates a rebuttable presumption that the 
TNC violated these provisions. PSC may adopt related regulations, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 480/ Page 4 
Procedures for Appeal 
 
A TNC must establish an internal procedure for an operator to appeal a deactivation, 
subject to various specified requirements. An operator who is deactivated by a TNC has 
the right to appeal the deactivation through the company’s internal procedure; the operator 
has 90 days to appeal, beginning on the date the operator receives notice of the deactivation. 
The TNC must review and respond to an appeal within 14 days, as specified. An operator 
may appeal the deactivation and pursue all avenues of relief available regardless of the 
geographic location of the incident that leads to the TNC’s decision to deactivate the 
operator. An operator may file a complaint with PSC or bring a civil action for a violation 
of the deactivation appeal provisions described above (1) on receipt of the TNC’s initial 
response to the internal appeal or (2) within 14 days after an operator initiates an internal 
appeal. PSC may adopt related regulations, as specified. 
 
Notice of Deactivation Procedures and Appeal Rights 
 
A TNC must provide each of the company’s operators written notice of the rights 
established under the bill within 24 hours of the operator providing transportation network 
service for the TNC. Additionally, at least once per year, a TNC must provide each of the 
company’s operators notice of the operator’s rights established under the bill, as specified. 
The notice must include specified information, including deactivation appeal rights and 
timelines, the TNC’s internal deactivation appeal procedure, and the right to file a 
complaint with PSC or bring a civil action for a violation of the bill. PSC may adopt related 
regulations, as specified, and may create and distribute a model notice of rights. 
 
The initial notice to each of the TNC’s operators must be provided by November 1, 2026. 
 
Information and Record Retention 
 
PSC must adopt regulations requiring a TNC to transmit information and records on 
operator deactivations to PSC on at least a quarterly basis, until July 1, 2028, and at least 
once every six months thereafter, as specified. PSC must also adopt regulations providing 
for the format, security, and privacy of the records. A TNC must retain (1) records that 
document compliance with the bill’s provisions for each of the company’s operators and 
(2) a compliance file for each deactivation for three years, which may include specified 
information. The bill establishes a rebuttable presumption that the company violated these 
record retention requirements for the relevant periods and for each operator for whom 
records were not retained. PSC may adopt related regulations, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation 
network services that encompasses TNCs (i.e., companies such as Uber and Lyft) and 
transportation network operators (i.e., the drivers), including licensing, criminal history 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 480/ Page 5 
records checks, insurance requirements, and assessments. A TNC may not operate in the 
State unless PSC has issued a permit to the company. Generally, a transportation network 
operator may not provide transportation network services unless PSC has authorized the 
operator to operate on a provisional basis or has issued a valid temporary or permanent 
transportation network operator’s license to provide transportation network services. 
Neither statute nor regulations require or otherwise specifically address transportation 
network operator deactivations and appeals. 
 
“Transportation network company” means a company that operates in the State using a 
digital network to connect passengers to transportation network operators or transportation 
network partners for transportation network services. 
 
“Transportation network operator,” “transportation network partner,” or “transportation 
network driver” means an individual who: 
 
 
has been issued a transportation network operator’s license or is otherwise 
authorized, by PSC to provide transportation network services; 
 
receives, through a TNC’s digital network application, a connection to a potential 
passenger to transport the passenger between points chosen by the passenger in 
exchange for the payment of a fee to the TNC; and 
 
uses a motor vehicle that is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the 
individual and is approved for use in providing transportation network services by 
PSC. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC advises that the bill creates significant new and incremental 
requirements on its Transportation Division that cannot be absorbed within existing 
resources. According to PSC’s most recent annual report, there are approximately 
175,000 transportation network operators in the State. PSC advises that it requires 
additional staff to implement the various requirements associated with adjudicating 
operator complaints and any potential appeals of its decisions to the circuit courts, plus a 
one-time programming expense for record retention and security. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $476,259 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring two attorneys, one administrative staff, and one Public Utility Law Judge to 
implement the bill’s various regulatory requirements. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one‑time 
start-up 
costs, 
ongoing 
operating 
expenses, 
and 
a 
one-time 
$100,000 programming expense. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 480/ Page 6 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$330,696 
Programming Costs 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    45,563 
Total FY 2027 PSC Expenditures 
$476,259 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the elimination of one-time 
costs. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
While it is possible that the changes to the definition of TNC and transportation network 
operator may alter the number of permitted TNCs and licensed transportation network 
operators, this analysis does not include any related effects on State finances or operations. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the 
Maryland Insurance Administration. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Transportation network operators potentially benefit from the 
deactivation appeal rights and related processes established by the bill and the 
general expansion of related definitions to encompass a wider range of potential business 
models. TNCs are generally not small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 747 and HB 1030 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Public 
Service 
Commission; 
Maryland 
Insurance 
Administration; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6