START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 513 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 513 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Hate Crimes and Hate Bias - Definitions of Sexual Orientation and Hate Bias 
Incident 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the definition of “sexual orientation” applicable to the protected classes 
under specified hate crime statutes and (2) alters hate crimes-related reporting requirements 
for the Department of State Police (DSP). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Hate Crimes 
 
The State’s hate crime statutes are contained in Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law 
Article. Statute identifies members of a protected class by prohibiting specified actions by 
a person if motivated in whole or in substantial part by another person’s or group’s race, 
color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, sex, gender identity, disability, national origin, 
or homelessness. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 513/ Page 2 
Under current law, “sexual orientation” means the identification of an individual as to male 
or female homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality. Under the bill, “sexual 
orientation” is defined to mean an individual’s identity, or other’s perception of an 
individual’s identity, in relation to the gender or genders to which the individual is sexually 
or emotionally attracted. “Sexual orientation” does not mean gender identity. 
 
Department of State Police Reporting 
 
Under current law, DSP must collect and analyze information about incidents apparently 
directed against an individual or group because of race, color, religious beliefs, sexual 
orientation, gender, disability, national origin, or homelessness. Each local law 
enforcement agency and the State Fire Marshal must provide DSP with information 
relating to these incidents. DSP must adopt procedures for the collection and analysis of 
this information. DSP must also make quarterly reports to the Maryland Commission on 
Civil Rights with the required information. 
 
Under the bill, DSP must collect and analyze information about hate crimes and hate bias 
incidents apparently directed against an individual or group because of race, color, 
religious beliefs, sexual orientation, gender, disability, national origin, or homelessness. 
The bill does not alter the remaining reporting requirements. 
 
The bill defines a “hate bias incident” as an act of hostility or aggression that (1) is directed 
at an individual or a group, private property, or public property; (2) is motivated, in whole 
or substantially in part, by another individual’s or group’s actual or perceived protected 
class status, as specified; and (3) does not constitute a crime under State or federal law. 
 
The bill specifically includes the following acts as hate bias incidents:  (1) slurs, 
name‑calling, and insults; (2) the display of material with offensive language, symbols, or 
threats targeting a protected class on private property; (3) the posting of material with 
offensive language, symbols, or threats targeting a protected class that does not result in 
property damage; (4) electronic and online distribution of material with offensive language, 
symbols, or threats targeting a protected class; and (5) distribution of materials with 
messages using offensive language, symbols, or threats targeting a protected class in a 
public place. 
 
Additional Comments:  The definition of “sexual orientation” under the hate crimes 
statute was last amended in 2021. It is identical to the definition of “sexual orientation” 
under § 20-101 of the State Government Article, which applies to various provisions, 
including laws prohibiting discrimination in employment, housing, and public 
accommodations. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 513/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1452 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Montgomery counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3