START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 538 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 538 
(Delegate Wolek) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Institutions of Higher Education - Mandatory Disclosures for New and 
Prospective Students (Informed Enrollment Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each institution of higher education in the State that admits first-time 
undergraduate students to prominently display, by July 1, 2027, a link to the  
U.S. Department of Education’s (ED) College Scorecard on its publicly accessible 
prospective student website and to explain and share the information in specified ways with 
new and prospective students. The bill is contingent on the continued publication of the 
College Scorecard by ED or another federal agency. Thus, if the Secretary of Higher 
Education determines that the College Scorecard resource has been discontinued by a 
federal agency, the Secretary must notify the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
within 10 days, after which the bill is abrogated and of no further force and effect. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Public four-year institutions and Baltimore City Community College can 
comply with the bill’s requirements using existing resources. The Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC) can notify DLS of the discontinuation of the College 
Scorecard, if necessary, using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can comply with the bill’s requirements using 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 538/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An institution is not required to discard or reprint existing related 
informational materials or prohibited from continuing to use them. However, any new 
related informational materials developed on or after July 1, 2027, must be designed, 
printed, and shared in accordance with the bill’s requirements.  
 
Current Law:  The College Scorecard, run by ED, presents information about colleges 
and their students, including salary after completing a degree. The salary information is the 
median annual earnings of former students one year after graduation. Only students who 
received federal financial aid are included in the calculation. Data is suppressed for majors 
with few graduates who received financial aid. The College Scorecard also presents data 
about the number of graduates in the major and median total debt for students who 
graduated with each major.  
 
The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) is a system of 
12 interrelated surveys conducted annually by ED’s National Center for Education 
Statistics. IPEDS gathers information from every college, university, and technical and 
vocational institution that participates in the federal student financial aid programs. The 
Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, requires that institutions that participate in 
federal student aid programs report data on enrollments, program completions, graduation 
rates, faculty and staff, finances, institutional prices, and student financial aid. The data 
collections occur in fall, winter, and spring. This data is made available to students and 
parents through the College Navigator college search website and to researchers and others 
through the IPEDS Data Center.  
 
State/Local Expenditures:  Public four-year institutions, Baltimore City Community 
College, and local community colleges can post the required College Scorecard links and 
share related information using existing resources. 
 
The bill explicitly does not require institutions to discard or reprint existing informational 
materials, nor does it prohibit their continued use. Beginning July 1, 2027, any newly 
developed related informational materials must comply with the bill’s requirements. 
 
MHEC can notify DLS in the event of the College Scorecard being discontinued using 
existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  Private institutions of higher education are also able to comply 
with the bill’s requirements using existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 538/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 713 and HB 611 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 430 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3