START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 551 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 551 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Drug Paraphernalia and Controlled Paraphernalia Prohibitions - 
Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals §§ 5-619 (drug paraphernalia) and 5-620 (controlled paraphernalia) of the 
Criminal Law Article, resulting in the elimination of all criminal prohibitions and 
associated penalties previously established under those sections. In addition, the bill repeals 
the statutory definitions of “drug paraphernalia” and “controlled paraphernalia” contained 
in Title 5 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal decrease in general fund revenues from fines imposed in the 
District Court. Expenditures are not materially affected, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in local reincarceration expenditures due to the 
bill’s elimination of existing drug paraphernalia and controlled paraphernalia offenses. 
Local revenues are not materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Drug Paraphernalia 
 
“Drug paraphernalia” means equipment, a product, or material that is used, intended for 
use, or designed for use, in (1) planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 551/ Page 2 
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, packaging, 
repackaging, storing, containing, or concealing a controlled dangerous substance (CDS) in 
violation of Title 5 of the Criminal Law Article or (2) injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or 
otherwise introducing into the human body a CDS in violation of Title 5 of the Criminal 
Law Article. Several items are specifically included as drug paraphernalia in statute. 
 
Use or Possession of Drug Paraphernalia:  Unless authorized under law, a person may not 
use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to: 
 
 
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, 
produce, process, prepare, pack, repack, store, contain, or conceal a CDS; or 
 
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a CDS into the human body.  
 
Delivery or Sale of Drug Paraphernalia:  Unless authorized under law, a person may not 
deliver or sell, or manufacture or possess with the intent to deliver or sell, drug 
paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where a person reasonably should know 
that the drug paraphernalia will be used to: 
 
 
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, 
produce, process, prepare, pack, repack, store, contain, or conceal a CDS; or 
 
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a CDS into the human body. 
 
A separate offense may be charged if a person who is at least 18 years old violates the 
above prohibition by delivering drug paraphernalia to a minor who is at least 3 years 
younger than the person. 
 
Advertisement to Promote Delivery or Sale of Drug Paraphernalia:  A person may not 
advertise in a newspaper, magazine, handbill, poster, sign, mailing, or other writing or 
publication, or by sound truck, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably 
should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, wholly or partly, is to promote the sale 
or delivery of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on penalties for offenses involving the use or possession, 
the delivery or sale, or the advertisement of the delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 551/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Criminal Penalties for Drug Paraphernalia Offenses  
§ 5-619 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Violation 
Penalty 
First-time violation (use, possession, 
delivery, sale, or advertisement to 
promote delivery or sale) 
Misdemeanor 
$500 maximum fine 
Subsequent violation (use, possession, 
delivery, or sale) 
Misdemeanor 
Up to one year imprisonment and/or a 
maximum fine of $1,000 
Subsequent violation (advertisement to 
promote delivery or sale) 
Misdemeanor 
Up to two years imprisonment and/or 
a maximum fine of $2,000 
First-time violation (use or possession) 
– violator has a prior conviction for 
delivery of drug paraphernalia by an 
adult to a minor who is at least 
three years younger 
Misdemeanor 
Up to one year imprisonment and/or a 
maximum fine of $1,000 
First-time violation (delivery or sale) – 
violator has a prior conviction for 
delivery of drug paraphernalia by an 
adult to a minor who is at least 
three years younger 
Misdemeanor 
Up to two years imprisonment and/or 
a maximum fine of $2,000 
Sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia 
by an adult to a minor who is at least 
three years younger 
Misdemeanor (separate) 
Up to eight years imprisonment 
and/or a maximum fine of $15,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Controlled Paraphernalia 
 
“Controlled paraphernalia” means (1) a hypodermic syringe, needle, or any other object or 
combination of objects adapted to administer a CDS by hypodermic injection; (2) a gelatin 
capsule, glassine envelope, or other container suitable for packaging individual quantities 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 551/ Page 4 
of a CDS; or (3) lactose, quinine, mannite, mannitol, dextrose, sucrose, procaine 
hydrochloride, or any other substance suitable as a diluent or adulterant. 
 
Section 5-620 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from possessing or 
distributing controlled paraphernalia under circumstances that reasonably indicate an 
intention to use the controlled paraphernalia for purposes of illegally administering a CDS. 
Unless otherwise specified, a person is also prohibited from obtaining or attempting to 
obtain controlled paraphernalia by: 
 
 
fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge; 
 
counterfeiting a prescription or a written order; 
 
concealing a material fact or the use of a false name or address; 
 
falsely assuming the title of or representing to be a manufacturer, distributor, or 
authorized provider; or 
 
making or issuing a false or counterfeit prescription or written order. 
 
Evidence of circumstances that reasonably indicate an intent to use controlled 
paraphernalia to manufacture, distribute, or dispense a CDS unlawfully include the close 
proximity of the controlled paraphernalia to an adulterant, diluent, or equipment commonly 
used to illegally manufacture, administer, distribute, or dispense a CDS, including a scale, 
a sieve, a strainer, a measuring spoon, staples, a stapler, a glassine envelope, a gelatin 
capsule, procaine hydrochloride, mannitol, lactose, quinine, and a CDS. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by (1) a $500 maximum fine for a 
first violation and (2) imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine for 
a second or subsequent violation. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease minimally due to the bill’s repeal of 
specified criminal offenses and associated fines.  
 
Exhibit 2 displays the number of violations and guilty dispositions for existing offenses 
repealed by the bill in fiscal 2024 and 2025. In fiscal 2025, there were 394 guilty 
dispositions in the District Court for using or possessing drug paraphernalia (§ 5-619(c) of 
the Criminal Law Article) and 0 guilty dispositions for all other drug and controlled 
paraphernalia offenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 551/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 2 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions  
Drug Paraphernalia and Controlled Paraphernalia  
§§ 5-619 and 5-620 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
 
Fiscal 2024 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
District Court Offenses  
 
 
 
 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(c) 
1,485 
292 
1,682 
394 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(d) 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(e) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-620 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
Circuit Court Offenses 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(c) 
27 
7 
35 
11 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(d) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-619(e) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-620 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) are not materially affected. For fiscal 2025, DPSCS advises 
that the Division of Corrections conducted four intakes and the Division of Parole and 
Probation opened cases for 76 individuals who had committed a drug or controlled 
paraphernalia-related offense. 
 
The Judiciary and the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advise that the bill would 
reduce their respective caseloads. Any reduction in the Judiciary’s workload is not 
anticipated to materially affect its finances or operations, as resources are assumed to be 
reallocated to other purposes. Similarly, the Department of Legislative Services advises 
that, given current OPD caseloads and resources, any reduction in OPD caseloads resulting 
from the bill are likely redirected to other cases. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues from fines imposed in the circuit courts are not 
materially affected. In fiscal 2025, there were 11 guilty dispositions in the circuit courts for 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 551/ Page 6 
using or possessing drug paraphernalia (§ 5-619(c) of the Criminal Law Article) and 
0 guilty dispositions for all other drug and controlled paraphernalia offenses. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures may decrease minimally as a result of the bill’s 
repeal of specified criminal offenses. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people 
in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local 
detention facilities have ranged from approximately $140 to $350 per incarcerated 
individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 327 (Senator McCray) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6