START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 598 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 598 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Physicians - Licensing - Internationally Trained Physicians 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP), beginning October 1, 2028, 
to issue a license to practice medicine to a physician licensed in a country other than the 
United States, its territories or possessions, Puerto Rico, or Canada who meets specified 
requirements. The term of the license may not exceed three years, and the license may not 
be renewed. MBP may determine an applicant ineligible for licensure if the applicant had 
(1) a previous disciplinary action, or (2) discipline or competency issues during 
postgraduate training. MBP may revoke a license if the licensee (1) practices outside the 
scope of the license, (2) has their employment terminated, (3) has been the subject of a 
disciplinary action, or (4) is no longer eligible for the license. MBP must adopt regulations 
for implementation, administration, and enforcement, including minimum qualifications 
and application fees, conditions applicable to a licensee, and a pathway to full licensure. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBP special fund expenditures increase by $28,400 in FY 2027 for 
additional staff beginning April 1, 2027. Future years reflect annualization, ongoing staff, 
and contractual services, as discussed below. MBP special fund revenues increase by an 
indeterminate amount from application fees beginning in FY 2029. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$28,400 
$207,100 
$735,900 
$739,900 
$743,800 
Net Effect 
($28,400) 
($207,100) 
($–) 
($–) 
($–)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 598/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An applicant must submit evidence to MBP that the applicant:   
 
 
has received a degree of Doctor of Medicine or its equivalent from a legally 
chartered medical school outside of the United States, its territories or possessions, 
Puerto Rico, or Canada that is recognized by the World Health Organization; 
 
has completed at least two years of postgraduate training in the country in which the 
applicant is licensed that is equivalent to a postgraduate residency program 
accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education; 
 
has been licensed or otherwise authorized to practice medicine in a country other 
than the United States, its territories or possessions, Puerto Rico, or Canada, and has 
practiced medicine for at least five of the last seven years; 
 
is in good standing with the medical licensing or regulatory authority in their 
country of practice, with which MBP, the Federation of State Medical Boards, or 
another nationally recognized medical standards oversight entity can verify the 
physician’s discipline and criminal background history; 
 
has no pending disciplinary matters before any licensing or regulatory body; 
 
has a valid certificate issued by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical 
Graduates; 
 
has achieved a passing score on steps 1, 2 (clinical knowledge), and 3 of the 
U.S. Medical Licensing Examination; 
 
is domiciled in the State; 
 
demonstrates oral and written competency in English; 
 
is of good moral character; and 
 
has satisfied any other criteria established by MBP for the issuance of a license to 
an international licensee. 
 
An applicant must also meet other requirements for licensure under MBP, as dictated in 
§§ 14-309 and 14-313 of the Health Occupations Article, which include (1) completing a 
criminal history records check (CHRC), (2) submitting an application to MBP, and 
(3) paying the application fee.  
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to § 14-307 of the Health Occupations Article, to qualify for a 
license as a physician, an applicant must be at least age 18, of good moral character, meet 
specified education requirements, pass an examination, submit to a CHRC, and meet any 
other requirements MBP establishes through regulations. An applicant must (1) have a 
doctoral degree of medicine that is accredited by an MBP-recognized organization and 
submit acceptable evidence to MBP of successful completion of one year of training in a 
postgraduate medical training program that is accredited by an MBP-recognized 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 598/ Page 3 
organization or (2) have a doctoral degree of osteopathy from a school of osteopathy in the 
United States, its territories or possessions, Puerto Rico, or Canada that has standards for 
graduation equivalent to those established by the American Osteopathic Association and 
submit acceptable evidence to MBP of successful completion of one year of training in a 
postgraduate medical training program that is accredited by an MBP-recognized 
organization. 
 
However, under current law, an applicant for a physician license is exempt from the above 
specified educational requirements if the applicant:   
 
 
has studied medicine at a foreign medical school; 
 
is certified by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates or its 
successor as approved by MBP; 
 
passes a qualifying examination for foreign medical school graduates required by 
MBP; 
 
meets any other qualifications for foreign medical school graduates that MBP 
establishes in its regulation for licensing of applicants; 
 
submits acceptable evidence to MBP of any requirements established in regulation; 
and 
 
meets at least one of the following requirements:  (1) the applicant graduated from 
any foreign medical school and submits acceptable evidence to MBP of successful 
completion of two years of training in a postgraduate medical education program 
accredited by an MBP-recognized organization or (2) the applicant successfully 
completed a fifth pathway program and submits specified evidence to MBP.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MBP advises that it requires significant additional resources to 
implement the new licensing authority under the bill. Specifically, MBP would require  
one new licensure analyst (to begin by April 1, 2027) to perform the full range of licensure 
services for additional applicants. The board advises that in Illinois (which created a 
pathway to licensure for internationally trained physicians in late 2025), the medical board 
received 100 applications for internationally trained physicians. In addition to handling the 
larger number of applications, licensure analysts would need to verify that an international 
postgraduate training program is substantially similar to one in the United States. MBP 
also advises that it would need to enter into contracts for several new contractual services, 
as discussed below. 
 
Prior to beginning to issue the new licenses, in fiscal 2028, MBP would incur 
approximately $125,000 in one-time software update expenses to incorporate the new 
license into the existing licensing system ($50,000) and web-based practitioner profile 
platform ($75,000). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 598/ Page 4 
Once licenses begin to be issued in October 2028 (fiscal 2029), MBP would require several 
annual contracts at an estimated annual cost of up to $650,000, including:  (1) $150,000 to 
evaluate the equivalency of medical education and training programs; (2) $100,000 to 
obtain background checks from international sources for each licensee; (3) $200,000 for 
translation services to translate documentation provided by applicants that is not in English; 
and (4) $200,000 for international legal consultant services to examine any disciplinary or 
legal matters related to an applicant that require investigation. To the extent these services 
are not needed, or can be obtained for less, special fund expenditures are reduced. 
 
Thus, MBP special fund expenditures increase by $28,422 in fiscal 2027. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one MBP licensure analyst effective April 1, 2027. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Position 
1.0 
- 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$20,670 
$79,260 
$83,117 
Contractual Services 
0 
125,000 
650,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
7,752 
2,805 
2,832 
Total State Expenditures 
$28,422 
$207,065 
$735,949 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. In fiscal 2028, special fund 
expenditures increase to $207,065 for ongoing staff and $125,000 in one-time only 
contractual expenses to update the licensure system and web-based practitioner profile. 
Beginning in fiscal 2029, expenditures increase to as much as $735,949 for ongoing staff 
and up to $650,000 in contractual services, as discussed above.  
 
Under the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2026, $2.0 million of the State 
Board of Physicians Fund balance may be used to support to programs in the Maryland 
Department of Health’s Office of Population Health Improvement. MBP advises that this 
would reduce the funds available for implementation of the bill. 
 
Special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2029 from 
licensure fees. The amount of such revenues depends on the fee set by MBP and the number 
of applicants for the new license and cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Additional Comments:  MBP conducted a workgroup and issued a report on the licensing 
of internationally trained physicians in 2024. In its report, the workgroup recommended 
legislation with a delayed implementation date (at least October 1, 2027) so that further 
recommendations can be made.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 598/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1199 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 380 (Senator Lewis Young) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5