START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 540 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 540 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Investor-Owned Electric, Gas, and Gas and Electric Companies - Utility Rate 
Changes (Public Service Company Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a public service company that is an investor-owned electric company, 
gas company, or combination gas and electric company, unless otherwise ordered by the 
Public Service Commission (PSC), from initiating a proceeding that may lead to a rate 
change unless it first (1) notifies customers of the proceeding, as specified, and (2) prepares 
and publishes a 10-year rate trend report that meets specified requirements. In addition, a 
public service company must include in each retail customer’s bill and automatic payment 
e-mail a specified statement regarding PSC and how to obtain information on participating 
in or observing a proceeding before PSC. By January 1, 2028, and annually thereafter, PSC, 
in consultation with the Office of People’s Counsel (OPC), must develop and publish an 
annual rate report for each public service company operating in the State. Related 
requirements are established for public service companies. OPC must bring a case to PSC 
if it determines that an annual rate report published by PSC contains incorrect or misleading 
information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC and OPC can implement the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to municipal electric utilities. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB0540/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The notice that a public service company must provide customers before 
initiating a proceeding that may lead to a rate change must be through a bill insert or 
separate e-mail and must notify customers (1) that such a proceeding is being initiated; 
(2) of the relevant procedural dates; and (3) where to find information regarding the rate 
change on PSC’s website. 
 
The 10-year rate trend report that a public service company must prepare and publish before 
initiating a proceeding that may lead to a rate change must (1) include a visual graphic 
depicting the 10-year rate change trend, as specified; (2) identify costs associated with 
transmission, distribution, and standard-offer or commodity service; and (3) account for all 
customer bill line items, including rate riders. 
 
By January 1, 2028, and by each January 1 thereafter, PSC, in consultation with OPC, must 
develop and publish on its website an annual rate report for each public service company 
operating in the State. The annual rate report must explain, in nontechnical terms, the 
observed rate trends. To develop the annual rate report for each public service company, 
PSC must use information provided by the public service company in its rate trend report. 
Each year, a public service company must (1) distribute to each retail customer a bill insert 
that includes the annual rate report and (2) post the annual rate report on its website. 
 
The bill does not apply to a municipal electric utility or an electric cooperative. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Public Service Company Rates 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that: 
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article; 
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and 
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
Generally, a public service company must file a tariff schedule of its rates and charges for 
its regulated services and for standard offer service with PSC. A public service company 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB0540/ Page 3 
may not sell, render services, or furnish a commodity until it files and publishes its rate 
schedules with PSC. Additionally, a public service company may not demand or collect 
(1) compensation that differs from compensation specified in its rate schedules that are in 
force at the time of the demand or collection or (2) a charge that violates the statutory 
provisions that govern public utilities. 
 
Rate Case Initiation and Notice Requirements 
 
Unless otherwise ordered by PSC, a public service company may not establish a new rate 
or change in rate unless the public service company (1) provides to PSC notice of the new 
rate or change in rate at least 30 days before the new rate is established or current rate is 
changed and (2) publishes the new rate or change in rate, as specified, during the entire  
30-day notice period in new schedules or plainly indicated amendments to existing 
schedules. The public service company must plainly set forth in the notice and publication 
(1) the changes that it proposes to the rate schedules currently in force and (2) the effective 
date of the changes. 
 
PSC may suspend, effective immediately and without formal proceedings, any new rate or 
change in rate proposed by a public service company. PSC may (1) suspend the rate initially 
for up to 180 days after the proposed effective date and (2) extend the suspension for up to 
an additional 90 days if the filing is for an alternative form of ratemaking for a public 
service company. 
 
Public Service Commission Proceedings 
 
To the extent necessary to receive public comment for each application for a rate increase, 
PSC must hold a hearing at a convenient location and time during evening hours (1) in 
person in the affected service area or (2) virtually, with appropriate notice provided so that 
persons in the affected service area may participate in the hearing. 
 
Customer Billing Requirements 
 
COMAR 
20.50.04.03 
(for 
service 
supplied 
by 
electric 
companies) 
and 
COMAR 20.55.04.03 (for service provided by gas companies) list the mandatory items 
that must appear on a customer bill. The regulations do not require a standardized statement 
describing PSC’s regulatory authority or explaining how customers may participate in a 
PSC proceeding. 
 
Additional Comments:  PSC advises that when a public service company files for a rate 
change, PSC issues a notice establishing the case docket, and a hearing is then held to set 
the procedural schedule. The bill requires a public service company to notify its customers 
when a proceeding that may result in a rate change is initiated and to include relevant 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB0540/ Page 4 
procedural dates. However, public service companies do not have that information at the 
time the proceeding is initiated, so they cannot provide that information to customers. 
 
Additionally, it is unclear which report a public service company must distribute to retail 
customers in a bill insert and post on its website each year. The ambiguity has no effect on 
the fiscal implications of the bill. 
 
OPC posts information on its website regarding utility rates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4