START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 631 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 631 
(Delegate Schindler) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Threats Against State or Local Official - Penalties 
 
 
This bill reclassifies the crime of making a threat against a State or local official from a 
misdemeanor to a felony. The bill increases the penalty for this offense from imprisonment 
for up to three years and/or a $2,500 maximum fine to imprisonment for up to 10 years 
and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not knowingly and willfully make a threat to take the life 
of, kidnap, or cause physical injury to a State official, a local official, a deputy 
State’s Attorney, an assistant State’s Attorney, or an assistant public defender. A person 
may not knowingly send, deliver, part with, or make for the purpose of sending or 
delivering a prohibited threat. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $2,500 maximum fine. 
 
“Threat” includes (1) an oral threat or (2) a threat in any written form, whether or not the 
writing is signed, or if the writing is signed, whether or not it is signed with a fictitious 
name or any other mark. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 631/ Page 2 
“Local official” means an individual serving in a publicly elected office of a local 
government unit. 
 
“State official” means a constitutional officer or officer-elect in an executive unit; a 
member or member-elect of the General Assembly; a judge or judge-elect; a judicial 
appointee; a State’s Attorney; a clerk of the circuit court; a register of wills; or a sheriff. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the bill is not anticipated to materially 
affect State or local finances or operations, including the finances and operations of the 
courts. However, changing crimes from misdemeanors to felonies means that (1) such 
cases are likely to be filed in the circuit courts rather than the District Court and (2) some 
persons may eventually serve longer incarcerations due to more stringent penalty 
provisions, applicable to some offenses for prior felony convictions. Accordingly, it is 
assumed that this bill shifts an unknown number of cases from the District Court to the 
circuit courts. It is not known whether such a prospective shift may spur more plea bargains 
and affect actual sentencing practices for this offense. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
advises that during fiscal 2025, it conducted one correctional intake (sentence of 
24 months) and opened seven new probation cases for the offense affected by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
me/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2