START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 694 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 694 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Addition Modification for Federal Tax-Exempt Income - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill specifies that the income tax addition modification for certain income exempted 
by federal law or treaty from federal but not State income tax does not apply to foreign 
earned income within the meaning of § 911(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC). The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is assumed that the bill simply clarifies existing law and does not materially 
affect State revenues, as discussed below. The Comptroller’s Office can make related 
updates to tax form instructions and guidance with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that the bill does not materially affect local revenues. Local 
expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To the extent excluded from federal adjusted gross income,  
Tax-General Article § 10-204(c) requires a resident to add back to income the amount of 
salary, wages, or other compensation for personal services that is exempted by federal law 
or treaty from federal income tax but not State income tax. The Comptroller’s Office 
advises that the requirement applies to, for example, wages earned in Maryland by a foreign 
national that are exempt from federal income tax due to a treaty but that are nonetheless 
subject to Maryland income tax. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 694/ Page 2 
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion  
 
Section 911 of the IRC allows a qualified individual to elect to exclude foreign earned 
income (as defined) from gross income for federal income tax purposes. The exclusion is 
available to an individual whose tax home is in a foreign country and who is (1) a citizen 
of the United States and establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury that 
the individual has been a bona fide resident of a foreign country or countries for an 
uninterrupted period that includes an entire taxable year or (2) a citizen or resident of the 
United States and is present in a foreign country or countries for at least 330 full days 
during any period of 12 consecutive months. 
 
“Foreign earned income” is defined as the amount received by an individual from sources 
within a foreign country or countries which constitute earned income attributable to 
services performed by such individual during the qualifying period. It does not include 
amounts received as a pension or annuity; paid by the United States or an agency thereof 
to an employee of the United States or an agency thereof; included in gross income by 
reason of IRC § 402(b) (taxability of a beneficiary of a nonexempt trust) or § 403(c) 
(taxability of a beneficiary under a nonqualified annuity or annuity purchased by an exempt 
organization); or received after the close of the tax year following the tax year in which the 
services to which the amounts are attributable are performed. 
 
The exclusion is limited to the amount of foreign earned income computed on a daily basis 
at an annual rate equal to a specified inflation-adjusted exclusion amount. For  
tax year 2026, the exclusion amount is $132,900. 
 
Cosgrove v. Comptroller  
 
The question of whether § 10-204(c) of the Tax-General Article requires a Maryland 
resident to add back the amount of any excluded foreign earned income on the Maryland 
income tax return was presented to the Maryland Tax Court in the case of Cosgrove v. 
Comptroller. The Cosgroves filed an amended Maryland income tax return excluding their 
§ 911 foreign earned income and claiming a Maryland income tax refund for two years. 
The Comptroller initially denied the Cosgroves’ refund claim and, on administrative repeal, 
determined that § 10-204 requires the addition of federally-excluded foreign earned income 
for State and local income tax purposes. However, prior to the Tax Court hearing, the 
Comptroller issued without explanation a refund to the Cosgroves with interest on the tax 
paid on the foreign earned income. The Comptroller subsequently filed a motion to dismiss, 
which was granted by the Tax Court and upheld by the Maryland Appellate Court. In its 
opinion, the Maryland Appellate Court advised that the General Assembly should examine 
§ 10-204 and clarify its application with respect to foreign earned income. Cosgrove v. 
Comptroller of Md., 263 Md. App. 147, 172 (2024). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 694/ Page 3 
State/Local Revenues:  The Comptroller’s Office has advised the Department of 
Legislative Services that the Comptroller’s position is that the addition modification under 
Tax-General Article § 10-204(c) does not apply to foreign earned income within the 
meaning of the IRC § 911 foreign earned income exclusion. Thus, this analysis assumes 
that the bill simply codifies the Comptroller’s interpretation of existing law. While the 
bill’s clarification to § 10-204(c) may increase utilization of the foreign earned income 
exclusion on the Maryland income tax return, it is assumed that any resulting impact on 
State general fund revenues or local income tax revenues is not material. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 163 (Senator West) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3