START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 670 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 670 
(Delegate Moreno, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Child Pornography - Prohibitions and Penalties 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from violating child pornography – related prohibitions under 
§ 11-207(a)(4) or § 11-208(b)(1) of the Criminal Law Article with 100 or more “images,” 
counted as specified. The bill also prohibits a person from violating § 11-207(a)(4) or  
§ 11-208(b)(1) or (2) with any “image” depicting a minor or an individual indistinguishable 
from an actual and identifiable child younger than age 13. Violators are guilty of a felony 
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years. A sentence imposed for a violation of these 
prohibitions may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with any other sentence 
imposed by the court for any other crime based on the acts establishing a violation of  
§ 11-207 or § 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s incarceration 
penalties. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Image” means any matter, visual representation, or performance, 
including photographs, pictures, electronic photographs, computer generated images, 
videos, electronic videos, film, videotapes, or similar visual representations or video 
depictions. 
 
To determine the number of images possessed by an individual (1) each photograph, 
picture, electronic photograph, computer-generated image, or similar visual representation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 670/ Page 2 
must be considered as one image and (2) each video, electronic video, film, videotape or 
similar video depiction must be considered as 20 images. 
 
Current Law:  Section 11-207(a)(4) of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from 
knowingly promoting, advertising, soliciting, distributing, or possessing with the intent to 
distribute any matter, visual representation, or performance (1) that depicts a minor 
engaged as a subject in sadomasochistic abuse or sexual conduct or (2) in a manner that 
reflects the belief, or that is intended to cause another to believe, that the matter, visual 
representation, or performance depicts a minor engaged as a subject of sadomasochistic 
abuse or sexual conduct. Violators are guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for 
up to 10 years and/or a $25,000 maximum fine for a first offense. A subsequent violation 
is a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to 20 years and/or a $50,000 maximum fine.  
 
Section 11-208(b)(1) of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from knowingly 
possessing and intentionally retaining a film, videotape, photograph, or other visual 
representation showing an actual child or a computer-generated image that is 
indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child younger than age 16 engaged as a 
subject of sadomasochistic abuse, engaged in sexual conduct, or in a state of sexual 
excitement. Section 11-208(b)(2) contains a similar prohibition that applies to knowingly 
or intentionally accessing and intentionally viewing these materials. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or 
a $2,500 maximum fine for a first offense. A person who has previously been convicted 
under § 11-208 is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or 
a $10,000 maximum fine. 
 
Section 11-208 does not prohibit a parent from possessing visual representations of the 
parent’s own child in the nude unless the visual representations show the child engaged as 
a subject of sadomasochistic abuse or in sexual conduct and in a state of sexual excitement. 
 
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating § 11-208 that the person promptly and 
in good faith (1) took reasonable steps to destroy each visual representation or (2) reported 
the matter to a law enforcement agency. 
 
Under § 11-208, “indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child” means an 
ordinary person would conclude that the image is of an actual and identifiable minor. 
“Indistinguishable from an actual and identifiable child” includes a computer-generated 
image that has been created, adapted, or modified to appear as an actual and identifiable 
child. It does not include images or items depicting minors that are drawings, cartoons, 
sculptures, or paintings. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase minimally for the Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) due to the bill’s incarceration penalty. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 670/ Page 3 
During fiscal 2025, the Division of Correction conducted intake on 18 individuals with 
sentences for promotion or distribution of child pornography under § 11-207(a)(4); the 
average sentence for this group was 4.5 years. DPSCS did not provide data on intakes for 
individuals sentenced under § 11-208(b)(1) for possession of child pornography, which has 
a shorter maximum sentence. Information is not available on the number of images 
involved in these cases.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,838 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility.   
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 545 and HB 364 of 2025 and SB 65 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 221 (Senator James) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3