START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 609 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 609 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
State Transfer Tax - Land Preservation Special Fund - Revenue Allocation 
 
   
This bill repeals provisions established under Chapter 604 of 2025 (the Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025) that redirect $25.0 million in transfer tax 
revenue to the general fund, in each of fiscal 2026 through 2029, that otherwise is allocated 
to Program Open Space (POS) State land acquisition, the Rural Legacy Program, and the 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF). The bill restores that 
revenue to POS State land acquisition, the Rural Legacy Program, and MALPF for 
fiscal 2027 through 2029. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $25.0 million annually in FY 2027 
through 2029. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly in those 
years. This bill repeals mandated distributions in FY 2027 through 2029.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$25.0 
$25.0 
$25.0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$25.0 
$25.0 
$25.0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from increased land preservation funding.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 609/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Transfer Tax 
 
The State transfer tax, which is 0.5% of the amount paid for the transfer of real property, 
is allocated among POS State land acquisition, the Rural Legacy Program, MALPF, and 
other purposes/programs through provisions in § 13-209 of the Tax-Property Article 
(governing the distribution of State transfer tax revenue) – particularly § 13-209(d) – and 
§ 5-903 of the Natural Resources Article (governing the allocation and use of funding 
distributed to POS under § 13-209 of the Tax-Property Article). 
 
Chapter 604 (Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025)  
 
Chapter 604 redirects $25.0 million in transfer tax revenue to the general fund, for 
fiscal 2026 through 2029, and requires the redirection to be accomplished by reducing 
funding for POS State land acquisition, the Rural Legacy Program, and MALPF in 
proportion to the amount of revenue each program is estimated to receive in each fiscal year 
under specified provisions of § 13-209 of the Tax-Property Article and § 5-903 of the 
Natural Resources Article.  
 
Chapter 604 also exempts the redirection of $25.0 million in fiscal 2026 through 2029 from 
provisions that require an appropriation or transfer of transfer tax revenue to the 
general fund occurring after fiscal 2018 to be reimbursed over the successive 
three fiscal years (with the reimbursement funding allocated as provided in § 13-209(d) of 
the Tax-Property Article and § 5-903 of the Natural Resources Article). 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget (Chapter 602 of 2025) reduced Rural Legacy Program funding by 
$10.0 million and MALPF funding by $15.0 million to allow for the redirection of 
$25.0 million to the general fund in fiscal 2026. POS State land acquisition was not 
allocated funding in fiscal 2026, so there was no proportional reduction to be made in 
POS State land acquisition funding. 
 
Program Open Space  
 
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) administers POS, which acquires and 
improves outdoor recreation and open space areas for public use. POS consists of a State 
and local component. Approximately 50% of the transfer tax funding distributed to POS is 
allocated to State land acquisition and capital development (and certain other programs), 
30% is allocated to local government acquisition and development, and 20% is allocated 
to State forest and park operations. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 609/ Page 3 
Rural Legacy Program 
 
The Rural Legacy Program, within DNR, provides funding for local governments and land 
trusts to purchase property and conservation easements within designated rural legacy 
areas. Rural legacy areas are designated as rich in a multitude of agricultural, forestry, 
natural, and cultural resources. Local governments and land trusts apply annually to the 
Rural Legacy Board, which makes recommendations for designating rural legacy areas and 
granting funds to preserve land in the rural legacy areas, that are then reviewed and 
approved by the Board of Public Works. 
 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation  
 
The General Assembly created MALPF to preserve productive agricultural land and 
woodland, limit the extent of urban development, and protect agricultural land and 
woodland as open space. MALPF, with the assistance and cooperation of landowners and 
local governments, purchases development rights easements as a means of protecting 
agricultural land and woodland production activities. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
General and Special Fund Impacts 
 
General fund revenues decrease by $25.0 million annually in fiscal 2027 through 2029, and 
special fund revenues and expenditures correspondingly increase by $25.0 million in those 
years, as shown in Exhibit 1.  
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Fiscal Impact of the Bill 
(in $ Millions) 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
General Fund Revenues 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
($25.0) 
Special Fund Revenues 
25.0 
25.0 
25.0 
Special Fund Expenditures 
25.0 
25.0 
25.0 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
        
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 609/ Page 4 
This estimate assumes that the bill’s repeal of Chapter 604’s exemption of the redirection 
of $25.0 million in fiscal 2026 through 2029 from the reimbursement requirement 
(see Current Law) does not require the $25.0 million redirected in fiscal 2026 to be 
reimbursed.  
 
It is unclear whether the bill’s repeal, in fiscal 2027 (July 1, 2026), of all of the redirection 
language added to statute by Chapter 604 (the language both establishing the redirections 
in fiscal 2026 through 2029 and exempting them from the reimbursement requirement) 
would be considered intended by the General Assembly to (1) result in the reimbursement 
of the fiscal 2026 redirection in addition to eliminating the fiscal 2027 through 
2029 redirections or (2) instead simply eliminate the fiscal 2027 through 2029 redirections.  
 
The latter seems to be a more likely interpretation of the bill since: 
 
 
under the reimbursement requirement, reimbursement is accomplished by the 
Governor including one-third of the reimbursement amount in the annual budget 
bills for each of the three successive fiscal years following the fiscal year in which 
the transfer is made; in the case of the fiscal 2026 redirection, the Governor would 
not be able to comply with that requirement for the first successive fiscal year 
following the fiscal 2026 transfer, because the bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and by 
then, the fiscal 2027 budget bill will have already been enacted; and 
 
the reimbursement requirement requires that the reimbursed funding be allocated as 
provided under § 13-209(d) of the Tax-Property Article and § 5-903 of the Natural 
Resources Article, causing reimbursed fiscal 2026 funding to not be returned 
entirely to the Rural Legacy Program and MALPF (see Current Law regarding 
POS not being affected by the fiscal 2026 redirection), but instead divided among 
those programs, POS State land acquisition, and others that are allocated funding 
under § 13-209(d) and § 5-903 – which would be an arguably illogical result. 
 
Allocation of Restored Funding 
 
The estimated allocation of the restored funding, among POS State land acquisition, the 
Rural Legacy Program, and MALPF in fiscal 2027 through 2029 is shown in Exhibit 2. 
The allocation is based on:  
 
 
the allocation of transfer tax funding under the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced; 
 
current estimates of transfer tax revenues through fiscal 2029: and 
 
certain assumptions about the allocation of transfer tax funding in fiscal 2028 and 
2029 that are consistent with the allocation of transfer tax funding in the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced.  
 
The restored funding can be administered by existing DNR and MALPF staff. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 609/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 2  
Estimated Allocation of Restored Funding 
(in $ Millions) 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
POS State Land Acquisition 
$7.4 
$8.5 
$8.9 
Rural Legacy Program 
5.9 
5.3 
5.1 
MALPF 
11.7 
11.1 
11.0 
Total 
$25.0 
$25.0 
$25.0 
 
POS:  Program Open Space 
MALPF:  Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments benefit from additional State funding available 
for land preservation under the Rural Legacy Program and MALPF. Local governments, 
along with land trusts, receive funding under the Rural Legacy Program for land 
preservation, and county agricultural land preservation programs work with MALPF to 
purchase agricultural land preservation easements in their jurisdictions. For a portion of 
easement purchases under MALPF that are not wholly State-funded, MALPF indicates that 
the bill increases its ability to match local funding for those easement purchases. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may meaningfully benefit small businesses that provide 
services associated with fee simple land acquisition and easement acquisition 
(e.g., title work, surveys, appraisals, and environmental assessments) by significantly 
increasing the amount of land preservation funding available under POS State land 
acquisition, the Rural Legacy Program, and MALPF in fiscal 2027 through 2029. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 424 (Senator Jennings) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 609/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6