START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 769 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 769 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners - Conditional License to Practice Social 
Work - Revisions 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals authorization for the State Board of Social Work Examiners 
(BSWE) to issue a conditional license under specified circumstance and instead requires 
the board to issue such a license to an applicant who, except for passing a required 
examination, has otherwise met the appropriate education and experience requirements. 
The holder of a conditional license and their supervising social worker are jointly 
responsible for ensuring compliance with supervision and expiration requirements. BSWE 
must issue a full license to a conditional licensee who has (1) achieved a satisfactory score 
on the required examination or (2) completed at least 1,500 hours of specified supervised 
experience. The board must adopt regulations to carry out the bill and, beginning 
December 31, 2026, submit an annual report on conditional licenses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. BSWE special fund expenditures increase by $64,900 
in FY 2027 for staff. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. BSWE special 
fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2027, as discussed 
below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$64,900 
$74,600 
$78,200 
$81,800 
$85,400 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 769/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A conditional license (1) authorizes the holder to practice social work in 
the State only within the scope of the specific category of license (bachelor social work or 
master social work); (2) requires the holder to practice under the supervision of a 
board‑approved supervisor in accordance with specified regulations; and (3) may be issued 
only to an initial applicant for licensure who has not previously been licensed by BSWE. 
 
BSWE must issue a full license to a conditional licensee who has: 
 
 
achieved a satisfactory score on an examination, as required; or 
 
completed at least 1,500 hours of supervised experience in the practice of social 
work during the period of conditional licensure, as verified by a board-approved 
supervisor, in accordance with standards established by the board, in consultation 
with an institution that (1) is accredited by the Council of Social Work Education or 
an equivalent organization approved by the council and (2) offers both a bachelor’s 
degree and a master’s degree. 
 
A conditional license (1) expires on a date set by the board that is at least 12 months, but 
not more than 24 months, after the date of issuance; (2) may not be renewed; and (3) must 
terminate automatically on the expiration date or the date that a full license is issued. 
 
Required Regulations 
 
BSWE must adopt regulations that establish (1) minimum supervision requirements and 
reporting procedures; (2) standards for evaluating supervised practice; (3) requirements to 
ensure that the tracking of conditional licenses aligns with existing licensure cycles;  
and (4) a reasonable fee for the issuance of a conditional license sufficient to cover 
administrative costs. 
 
Required Report 
 
Annually beginning December 1, 2026, BSWE must report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee (now the Health 
Committee) the following information for the immediately preceding 12-month period:  
(1) the number of conditional licenses issued; (2) the number of holders of conditional 
licenses who obtained full licensure; and (3) any recommendations for improving the 
implementation of conditional licenses and the impact of such licenses on the health care 
workforce. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by BSWE to practice social work 
in Maryland. In general, to obtain a license, an applicant must (1) submit a written 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 769/ Page 3 
application; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) be of good moral character; (4) successfully 
pass required examinations pertinent to the license sought; (5) pay any applicable fees; 
(6) complete a criminal history records check; and (7) if required, complete a mental or 
physical examination by a board-appointed health care practitioner. Each license expires 
every two years, after which the licensee must pay a renewal fee, submit a renewal 
application, submit satisfactory evidence of compliance with any continuing education 
requirements, and otherwise be entitled to be licensed. 
 
Categories of Social Work Licensure 
 
A licensed bachelor social worker (LBSW) must have a bachelor’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program. A licensed master social worker (LMSW) must 
have, or be a candidate for, a master’s degree in social work from an accredited social work 
program. Generally, an LBSW or an LMSW must practice social work under the 
supervision of another social worker, unless given approval to engage in independent 
practice. 
 
A licensed certified social worker (LCSW) must have a master’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program and provide documentation of having completed 
two years of specified supervised experience. LCSW licenses are no longer issued but are 
renewed by BSWE. 
 
A licensed certified social worker-clinical (LCSW-C) must have a master’s degree in 
social work from an accredited social work program and documentation of 12 academic 
credits in clinical course work, as specified. An LCSW-C must also provide documentation 
of having completed two years as a licensee with specified supervised experience of 
face‑to‑face client contact, formulation of a diagnostic impression, and treatment of mental 
disorders and other conditions and the provision of psychotherapy. 
 
Conditional Licensure 
 
Chapter 317 of 2023 authorized BSWE to issue a conditional license to practice bachelor 
social work or master social work to an applicant who, except for passing the required 
examination, has met the appropriate education and experience requirements for licensure. 
The board may issue a conditional license if an administrative delay or an unforeseen 
circumstance, act, or occurrence prevents a required examination from being available to 
an applicant for at least 15 business days. A conditional license is valid until 180 days after 
the examination becomes readily available to the applicant. A conditional license 
authorizes the holder to practice bachelor or master social work in the State only under the 
supervision of a board-approved supervisor. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 769/ Page 4 
Social Worker Practice with Pending Licensure Application 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.42.01.13) an applicant may practice social work 
without a license if the applicant has otherwise met specified requirements, including paid 
applicable fees, and is (1) licensed in any other state, qualified in another county, or 
qualified by a federal entity of the United States; (2) submitted a complete written 
application for a license and the application is pending with the board; and (3) has passed, 
or expects to pass within five months of applying for licensure, an Association of Social 
Work Boards examination, as specified. An applicant may not practice with a pending 
application for more than six months or represent to the public by title or representation 
that the applicant is a social worker who is licensed in the State. 
 
Interstate Social Work Licensure Compact 
 
Chapters 9 and 10 of 2025 entered Maryland into the Interstate Social Work Licensure 
Compact. A multistate license authorizes a licensee to practice as a regulated social worker 
in all member states under multistate authorization to practice. 
 
To be eligible for a multistate license, an applicant must, among other requirements, 
(1) hold or be eligible for an active, unencumbered license in the home state; (2) pay 
applicable fees; (3) complete a specified criminal history records check; (4) notify the home 
state of any adverse action, encumbrance, or restriction on any professional license taken 
within 30 days from the date the action is taken; (5) meet any continuing competence 
requirements established by the home state; and (6) abide by the laws, regulations, and 
applicable standards in the member state where the client is located at the time care is 
rendered. 
 
To be eligible for a multistate license in a specific category of social work licensure 
(clinical, master’s, or bachelor’s), an applicant must fulfill specified competency 
requirements and attain the appropriate degree in social work. Clinical-category multistate 
license applicants must also fulfill a specified practice requirement. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As of January 2026, BSWE oversees approximately 20,300 active 
social work licensees and issues approximately 3,700 new licenses per year. 
 
The bill requires BSWE to issue a conditional license to applicants who meet specified 
requirements, promulgate regulations regarding conditional licensure, and submit an 
annual report. As an emergency measure, the bill takes effect upon the signature of the 
Governor (likely fiscal 2026). However, this analysis assumes that BSWE cannot issue 
conditional licenses under the bill until after the regulations required by the bill have been 
promulgated. The Maryland Department of Health has previously advised that it takes 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 769/ Page 5 
approximately six months to promulgate regulations. Therefore, this analysis assumes any 
fiscal impact is delayed until fiscal 2027. 
 
Although Chapter 317 authorizes the board to issue conditional licenses, BSWE has yet to 
issue any such licenses. Since the bill allows a holder of a conditional license to qualify for 
full licensure by either demonstrating satisfactory completion of an examination or 
specified supervised experience, the bill creates an additional pathway to full licensure. 
Thus, BSWE anticipates an increase in conditional license applications under the bill. 
 
Each new applicant for a social worker license in Maryland must pay a $100 application 
processing fee and a $75 initial license fee. Under the bill, BSWE must set a reasonable 
fee for the issuance of a conditional license to cover administrative costs. 
 
The number of individuals that may seek conditional licensure under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. Further, the fee for a conditional license must be set in 
regulations. Therefore, the Department of Legislative Services notes that any increase in 
board special fund revenues from license fees cannot be reliably quantified. For illustrative 
purposes only, if 500 individuals seek conditional licensure and pay the current 
$100 application processing fee and the $75 initial license fee, special fund revenues 
increase by $87,500. 
 
BSWE advises that conditional licensees would likely be required to pay an additional 
$75 license fee for a full license. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although BSWE is currently authorized to issue conditional licenses 
to specified individuals, the board anticipates that additional staff will be required to 
process conditional license applications, track conditional license holders’ examination or 
supervised experience progress, notify conditional licensees when their license is expiring, 
and convert conditional licensees to full licensees as necessary. 
 
Therefore, BSWE special fund expenditures increase by $64,900 in fiscal 2027. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrator (beginning October 1, 2026, following 
the promulgation of required regulations) to manage the additional workload associated 
with issuing conditional licenses. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$55,759 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$64,900 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 769/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Based on current social work application and license fees, if approximately 370 applicants 
apply for a conditional license in fiscal 2027, special fund revenues would be sufficient to 
cover these administrative expenses in fiscal 2027. The number of new applicants for a 
conditional license would have to increase to approximately 425 in fiscal 2028, and to 
488 by fiscal 2031, to continue to cover ongoing costs. Alternatively, BSWE could adjust 
conditional license fees to sufficiently cover administrative costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 18 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6