START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 703 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 703 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Dorchester County - County Property Leases - Notice Exemptions 
 
 
This bill authorizes Dorchester County to enter into a lease of county property without 
giving notice, as specified, if the lease has a term of five years or less and annual rent  
up to $750. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Dorchester County advertising expenditures may decrease beginning in 
FY 2027; however, any impact is likely to be minimal. Dorchester County revenues are 
not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Before a county disposes, grants, or leases county property, the county is 
required to publish notice of the action once a week for three consecutive weeks in at least 
one newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice must include the terms and 
the compensation to be received and give opportunity for objections. A county may grant 
an easement for a public utility without giving notice. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Dorchester County expenditures for advertising public notices may 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2027. The current cost for the county to advertise each notice 
is estimated at $200. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 703/ Page 2 
Dorchester County advises that the removal of the three-week published notice requirement 
under the bill could potentially result in the county leasing out certain county properties 
more quickly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 797 and HB 563 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 391 (Dorchester County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Dorchester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2