START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 918 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 918 
(Delegate Young, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Baltimore City - Cigarettes, Other Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking 
Devices - Local Laws Authorization 
 
 
This bill expressly authorizes the Baltimore City Council to enact and the Mayor of 
Baltimore City to enforce local laws that are at least as stringent as State laws that regulate 
the sale and distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products (OTP), and electronic 
smoking devices (ESD), except for the issuance of cigarette, OTP, and ESD licenses and 
the taxation of cigarettes and OTP. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State general fund revenues may be affected, as discussed below. 
State expenditures are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues and expenditures may increase, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Titles 16, 16.5, and 16.7 of the Business Regulation Article govern tobacco 
licensing and the sale and distribution of cigarettes, OTP, and ESD. 
 
“ESD” is defined as a device that can be used to deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine 
to an individual inhaling from the device. It includes (1) an electronic cigarette, an 
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, a vape 
pen, and vaping liquid and (2) any component, part, or accessory of such a device 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 918/ Page 2 
regardless of whether or not it is sold separately, including any substance intended to be 
aerosolized or vaporized during use of the device. “ESD” excludes a drug, device, or 
combination product authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or a battery or battery charger when sold 
separately. 
 
“OTP” is defined as any product that is intended for human consumption or likely to be 
consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested in 
any manner that is made of, derived from, or contains tobacco or nicotine, with specified 
exclusions. “OTP” (1) includes cigars, premium cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, filters, 
rolling papers, pipes, and hookahs and (2) excludes cigarettes, ESD, tobacco pipes (as 
defined in the Tax – General Article), or drugs, devices, or combination products 
authorized for sale by FDA under the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
 
The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission is responsible for monitoring and 
enforcement activity related to tobacco licenses. The Comptroller’s Office is responsible 
for enforcement of tobacco taxes. 
 
Tobacco Product Taxes 
 
The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2024 increased (1) the tobacco 
tax rate for cigarettes from $3.75 to $5.00 per package of 20 cigarettes and from 17.5 cents 
to 25.0 cents for each cigarette in a package of more than 20 cigarettes and (2) the tobacco 
tax rate for OTP, other than cigars and pipe tobacco, from 53% to 60% of the wholesale 
price. Generally, the tax rate for cigars is 70% of the wholesale price of the cigars. The tax 
rate for premium cigars is 15% of the wholesale price of the premium cigars, and the tax 
rate for pipe tobacco is 30% of the wholesale price of the pipe tobacco. For out-of-state 
sellers of premium cigars and pipe tobacco, the tobacco tax rate applies to the actual price 
paid by the out‑of‑state seller for a stock keeping unit or, if the actual price paid is not 
available, the average of the actual price paid for such a unit over the 12 calendar months 
before January 1 of the year in which the sale occurs. 
 
ESD and their components are subject to the State sales and use tax but are not subject to 
a State excise tax. The BRFA of 2024 increased the sales and use tax rate that generally 
applies to these products from 12% to 20% of the taxable price. The sales and use tax rate 
for vaping liquid sold in a container that contains up to 5 milliliters of vaping liquid is 60% 
of the taxable price. Montgomery County imposes a 30% tax on the wholesale value of 
vaping products. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 918/ Page 3 
Altadis U.S.A., Inc. et al. v. Prince George’s County, Maryland 
 
In Altadis U.S.A., Inc. et al. v. Prince George’s County, Maryland 431 Md. 307 (2013), the 
petitioners challenged the validity of two Prince George’s County ordinances regulating 
the packaging, sale, or other distribution of cigars, contending that the ordinances 
conflicted with State statutes regulating the packaging and sale of cigars. The (then) 
Court of Appeals held that State law occupied the field of regulating the packaging and 
sale of tobacco products, including cigars, and so preempted the two ordinances. Thus, the 
Prince George’s County ordinances were invalid. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect:  The bill expressly authorizes Baltimore City to enact 
and enforce local laws regulating the sale and distribution of tobacco products, as specified. 
Baltimore City has considered and adopted local legislation relating to the sale and 
distribution of tobacco products. The bill’s impact depends on the extent to which the city 
enacts local laws that are more stringent than State law and the extent to which such laws 
are successfully implemented as a result of the bill (or the extent to which such laws would 
be successfully challenged in the absence of the bill). As discussed above, in 
Altadis (2013), the (then) Court of Appeals struck down two Prince George’s County 
ordinances governing the distribution of cigars, holding that the ordinances were impliedly 
preempted by State law. 
 
Thus, to the extent that the city successfully enacts and enforces local laws that are 
more stringent than State law as a result of the bill, city revenues and expenditures may 
increase. Similarly, small businesses that sell tobacco products in Baltimore City are 
potentially affected to the extent they are subject to additional local regulation as a result 
of the bill. 
 
Additionally, to the extent that Baltimore City successfully enacts and enforces local laws 
that have the effect of restricting or reducing the sale and consumption of tobacco products, 
State general fund revenues may be affected due to forgone tax revenues collected from 
the sale of these products. Any such impact, however, cannot be reliably predicted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 279 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 918/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Baltimore City; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4