START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 95 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 95 
(Senator Ellis) 
Finance 
 
 
Property and Casualty Insurance - Parametric Insurance - Regulation 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory framework that allows insurers to provide “parametric 
insurance” products in the State, including various responsibilities for the Maryland 
Insurance Administration (MIA) and requirements for insurers who offer parametric 
insurance products. The bill authorizes MIA to establish a related pilot program for 
parametric insurance products and requires MIA to adopt regulations regarding the 
implementation of parametric insurance products by January 1, 2027. The bill also requires 
MIA to report to the General Assembly on the progress of implementing the bill by no later 
than December 1 of each year, beginning December 1, 2027. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MIA increase by $218,006 in FY 2027 for 
additional staff; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and elimination of one-time 
costs. Minimal increase in special fund revenues for MIA in FY 2027 only from rate and 
form filing fees. General fund revenues may be affected, as discussed below; however, this 
potential impact is not shown below. This analysis does not include potential costs for 
additional staff that may be needed by MIA in future fiscal years, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$218,000 
$259,500 
$271,400 
$283,600 
$296,000 
Net Effect 
(-) 
($259,500) 
($271,400) 
($283,600) 
($296,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 95/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions and Applicability  
 
“Basic risk” means the risk that a parametric benefit does not equal the policyholder’s 
actual loss. “Fallback mechanism" means a data source used to track or collect information 
related to natural disasters; this includes satellite imagery and radar data. “Independent data 
source” means a specified governmental or third-party agency, sensor network, or scientific 
instrument used to confirm trigger events. 
 
“Low-income household” means a household with an income that does not exceed 50% of 
the area median income for a household of the same size. “Moderate-income household” 
means a household with an income that does not exceed 80% of the area median income 
for a household of the same size. 
 
“Parametric insurance” means a policy that pays a predetermined benefit when a specified, 
objectively measurably trigger event occurs, regardless of actual loss.  
 
“Trigger event” means a natural disaster including, among other things, an earthquake or a 
flood. This does not include a cyber-related event. To qualify as a trigger event, the event 
must be measurable through objective criteria and verifiable by an independent source. To 
measure a trigger event, an insurer may use a proprietary index or fallback mechanism. If 
using a proprietary index, the insurer must provide access to audit reports.  
 
The bill’s requirements and authorizations apply only with respect to parametric insurance 
policies or certificates that are issued to a resident of the State or sold, negotiated, or offered 
in the State. Regarding trigger events, an insurer is not required to disclose proprietary 
information or trade secrets under applicable law. 
 
Pilot Program 
 
The bill authorizes MIA to establish a pilot program in the State to:   
 
 
provide participating insurers with additional opportunities to provide parametric 
insurance products;  
 
serve a public need;  
 
protect vulnerable populations; and  
 
advance policy goals in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 95/ Page 3 
MIA may expedite the review process for any public or community-based pilot programs, 
and MIA may authorize an insurer to offer products for low- or moderate-income 
households, small businesses, local governmental units, or public entities. MIA must 
require each participating insurer to report to them regarding the results of the pilot 
program by December 1 of each year. 
 
Required Filings by Insurers  
 
An insurer that issues parametric insurance products in the State may not adopt an 
underwriting standard of the policy in the case of a trigger event unless the insurer has filed 
the standard with MIA. The filing must be made at least 60 days prior to when the insurer 
proposes to implement the standards. The insurer must include, among other things, (1) a 
copy of the underwriting standard the insurer intends to implement, (2) the date on which 
the insurer intends to implement the underwriting standard, and (3) the contract terms. Any 
underwriting standard adopted must comply with all applicable laws.  
 
An insurer that offers parametric insurance products in the State must also file with MIA, 
all rates, supplementary rate information, policy forms, modifications of rates, and 
endorsements that the insurer proposes to use. The insurer must clearly state the applicable 
effective dates of the rates and the character and extent of the coverage being considered. 
 
Notice Requirements for Insurers 
 
At the time of application, and annually to policyholders, each insurer that offers 
parametric insurance in the State must provide the applicant or policyholder with a written 
notice summarizing the coverages and exclusions under the policies issued by the insurer. 
An offer to provide parametric insurance must also include an explanation, written in clear 
and specific terms of specified terms, methodologies, risks, and processes related to the 
policy.  
 
Further, insurers must provide individual or small business policyholders, at the time of 
application or renewal, with a one-page fact sheet written in clear, concise language and 
including specified information about the insurer, describing the basic risk under the 
policy. The fact sheet must be sent either electronically to the insureds last known email 
address or via first class mail to the insureds last known physical address. 
 
Reporting Requirements for Insurers 
 
On or before December 1 each year, each insurer that offers parametric insurance must 
report the following information to MIA: 
 
 
the number of policies issued; 
 
premiums; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 95/ Page 4 
 
triggering events; 
 
provided benefits; 
 
information on any disputes; and 
 
basic risk incidents. 
 
Current Law:  MIA and the Insurance Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties 
include, among other things, certifying insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and 
approving the rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance 
professionals. MIA and the Commissioner have broad authority to enforce the 
requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers and insurance professionals. For 
example, depending on the type of violation and following the administrative processes 
required by Insurance Law and regulations, the Commissioner is authorized to issue orders 
directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain actions, impose administrative 
penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or licenses.  
 
Insurance Law includes guidelines and instructions related to the manner in which insurers 
calculate and apply their premium rates to ensure such rates do not become excessive, 
inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory. With limited exception, rates must generally be 
filed with MIA prior to being used. 
 
The Insurance Article expressly prohibits certain insurer practices and activities as unfair 
trade practices. One such practice is that, with respect to any type of insurance, an insurer 
may not cancel or refuse to provide or renew coverage for a reason based wholly or partly 
on race, color, creed, sex, or blindness of an applicant or policyholder or for any arbitrary 
capricious, or unfairly discriminatory reason. 
 
State Revenues:  Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each 
authorized insurance company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company 
that sells, or an individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage 
upon a risk that is located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund. Depending on 
the number and extent to which parametric insurance policies are issued in the State under 
the bill’s authorization, premium taxes could be affected. Any such impact, however, 
cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill and is not included in 
this analysis.   
 
State Expenditures:  While the bill does not require MIA to establish a pilot program, this 
analysis assumes MIA will do so. Moreover, because the bill does not terminate, this 
analysis assumes that insurers that choose to offer parametric insurance continue to do so 
beyond the pilot program established by MIA. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 95/ Page 5 
Therefore, special fund expenditures increase by $218,006 in fiscal 2027, which assumes 
a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026, effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one Director and one Senior Analyst to draft new regulations, meet with 
stakeholders (insurance providers and community members), implement and oversee the 
pilot program, and draft the annual reports required by the bill. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$199,724 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$218,006 
 
 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
MIA advises that additional staff may be needed in future fiscal years to assist with 
oversight and enforcement activities for insurers that choose to issue parametric insurance 
products under the bill. However, any such impact depends on how many insurers 
ultimately offer parametric insurance products, which cannot be reliably predicted at this 
time. Therefore, any such impact is not included in this analysis.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5