START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 86 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 86 
(Senator Charles) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
General Assembly - Office Space, Services, and Equipment 
 
 
This bill repeals the prohibition against a local government subsidizing a member of the 
General Assembly in the maintenance of office space, services, or equipment. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential indeterminate decrease in general fund expenditures beginning in 
FY 2027, but a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase to the extent local 
governments elect to subsidize members of the General Assembly with the maintenance of 
office space, services, or equipment. Any such expenditures are discretionary. Local 
revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State must provide the members of the General Assembly with 
reasonable office space and services, equipment, and secretarial services, as provided in 
the State budget. Local governments are prohibited from subsidizing a member of the 
General Assembly in the maintenance of the space, services, or equipment. However, this 
prohibition does not prevent the establishment of an office by a local government to 
maintain liaison between the local government and the General Assembly. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 86/ Page 2 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes approximately 
$12.3 million for the General Assembly for nonpersonnel related operating expenses, 
which includes rent, office supplies and equipment, and contractual services. The 
Department of Legislative Services cannot predict or estimate which, if any, local 
jurisdictions choose to subsidize members of the General Assembly under the bill. 
However, general fund expenditures may decrease to the extent local governments elect to 
subsidize members of the General Assembly, thereby reducing the need for the State to 
cover the subsidized costs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford County; Cities of College Park and 
Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Budget and Management; State 
Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2