START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 348 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 348 
(Senator Jackson) 
Finance 
 
 
Hospitals and Freestanding Birthing Centers - High-Risk Pregnancies - 
Communication After Discharge 
 
   
This bill alters the time by which a hospital or freestanding birthing center must call a 
birthing parent following delivery after a high-risk pregnancy. Not later than 72 (rather 
than 48) hours after discharge, a hospital or freestanding birthing center must call the 
birthing parent to evaluate the parent’s status and, as necessary, provide information about 
postpartum complications. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect governmental 
finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis  
 
Current Law:  If a newborn is delivered in a hospital or a freestanding birthing center 
following a high-risk pregnancy, the hospital or freestanding birther center must 
(1) complete a postpartum infant and maternal referral form and submit the form to the 
local health department where the birthing parent resides; (2) provide the birthing parent 
with resources and information specific to their circumstances, including information 
regarding the risks, signs, preventive measures, and treatment needs for postpartum 
complications, including cardiovascular conditions, chronic disease, substance misuse, and 
mental health conditions; and (3) call the birthing parent at least 24 hours, but not later than 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 348/ Page 2 
48 hours, after discharging the parent to evaluate the parent’s status and, as necessary, 
provide information about postpartum complications. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2