START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 328 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 328 
(Senator Folden) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Property Tax Credit - Disabled or Fallen Public Safety Officer - Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes changes to the local option property tax credit for disabled or fallen public 
safety officer by expanding eligibility to disabled public safety officers who have died 
regardless of the cause of death. Under current law, these individuals must have died as a 
result of employment as a law enforcement or correctional officer or while in active service 
of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical service. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and 
applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and changes to existing eligibility 
requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property tax credit. 
Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters the definition of fallen public safety officer to include a 
disabled public safety officer who dies regardless of the cause of death. Local governments, 
however, are authorized to limit eligibility for the property tax credit to the existing criteria 
established under current law. The bill also allows, under specified circumstances, the 
amount of the credit for a newly purchased dwelling owned by a disabled public safety 
officer or the surviving spouse or cohabitant to be in the same proportion as the property 
tax credit initially granted for a previous dwelling. In addition, the bill removes the 
requirement that the dwelling must have been acquired within a certain number of years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 328/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling owned by (1) a disabled public safety or judicial officer; (2) a surviving spouse 
of a fallen public safety or judicial officer; or (3) a cohabitant, provided specified 
conditions are met. Public safety officer includes a correctional officer, a law enforcement 
officer, or a member of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical service. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit. The amount of the decrease depends on the number of eligible taxpayers and the 
assessed value of each residential property that is eligible for the property tax credit, neither 
of which can be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
At present, Baltimore City and the following 14 counties have authorized the property tax 
credit – Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, Harford, 
Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Wicomico. 
 
Montgomery County granted property tax credits to six recipients in fiscal 2024 and 2025 
in the amounts of $28,402 and $30,477, respectively. 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 330 of 2025 and SB 25 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2