START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 321 
(Senator Sydnor) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Public Safety - Law Enforcement Agencies - Use of Body-Worn Cameras 
 
   
This bill alters and expands the application of existing provisions that require specified law 
enforcement agencies to require the use of a body worn camera (BWC) by each law 
enforcement officer employed by the law enforcement agency who regularly interacts with 
members of the public as part of the law enforcement officer’s official duties. Under the 
bill, all law enforcement agencies must require the use of a BWC by each sworn law 
enforcement officer, regardless of rank, employed by the law enforcement agency while 
the officer is in uniform, in public, and conducting law enforcement related duties.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $1.4 million, higher education 
expenditures increase by at least $563,000, and special fund expenditures increase by at 
least $49,000 in FY 2027, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization, inflation, 
and minimum ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1,358,700 
695,400 
703,600 
711,900 
720,200 
SF Expenditure 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
Higher Ed Exp. 
563,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($1,970,700) 
($744,400) 
($752,600) 
($760,900) 
($769,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase, potentially significantly, for some 
jurisdictions. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 321/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 60 of 2021 required, by July 1, 2023, the Department of State 
Police (DSP), the Anne Arundel County Police Department, the Howard County Police 
Department, and the Harford County Sheriff’s Office to require the use of a BWC by each 
law enforcement officer employed by the law enforcement agency who regularly interacts 
with members of the public as part of the law enforcement officer’s official duties, subject 
to the agency’s policy on the use of BWCs. By July 1, 2025, a law enforcement agency of 
a county not mentioned above was required to meet these same requirements.  
 
A BWC that possesses the requisite technological capability must automatically record and 
save at least 60 seconds of video footage immediately prior to the officer activating the 
record button on the device. 
 
A law enforcement agency subject to the BWC requirements must develop and maintain a 
written policy consistent with the policy published by the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission for the use of BWCs. The policy must specify which law 
enforcement officers employed by the law enforcement agency are required to use BWCs. 
A law enforcement agency may not negate or alter any of the requirements or policies 
established in accordance with specified BWC-related provisions through collective 
bargaining. 
 
State Expenditures:  State expenditures (multiple fund types) increase significantly 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to establish or expand BWC programs within State law 
enforcement agencies in accordance with the bill’s requirements. Information gleaned from 
a survey of potentially affected State law enforcement agencies is provided below. In 
summary, general fund expenditures increase by at least $1.4 million, higher education 
expenditures increase by at least $563,000, and special fund expenditures increase by at 
least $49,000 in fiscal 2027. Future year expenditures reflect annualization, inflation, and 
minimum ongoing costs. 
 
Department of State Police 
 
General fund expenditures for DSP increase by at least $1.2 million in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
purchasing additional BWC equipment as well as the cost of hiring one technician and 
one administrative specialist to manage DSP’s expanded BWC program and handle related 
Public Information Act requests. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start‑up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below:  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 321/ Page 3 
 
according to DSP, approximately 261 additional law enforcement officers within 
DSP require BWCs, and the Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) within DSP 
needs 75 BWCs, at a cost of $2,200 per device, including initial license, software, 
and storage costs; 
 
additional ongoing operating expenses are incurred for user management, licensing, 
and storage of BWC footage for OSFM; and 
 
one vehicle is needed for the technician to provide maintenance and support to 
officers using BWCs.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$130,997 
BWC Equipment 
1,004,200 
Automobile Purchase 
45,261 
Other Operating Expenses 
       18,282 
Total FY 2027 DSP Expenditures 
$1,198,740 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
and ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that additional BWC maintenance and 
storage are needed, out-year expenditures increase further.  
 
Comptroller’s Office 
 
General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by at least $139,000 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of leasing 20 BWCs for the Field Enforcement Bureau at a cost of $3,200 
per camera, with an additional initial set-up fee of $75,000. Future year expenditures reflect 
ongoing costs for video storage, licensing, and other operational support for the BWCs. To 
the extent that additional BWC equipment, maintenance, and storage are needed, out-year 
expenditures increase further. 
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission  
 
General/special fund expenditures for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
(ATCC) increase by at least $70,000 in fiscal 2027 (30% general funds; 70% special funds) 
to purchase BWC equipment and for user management, licensing, and storage of BWC 
footage. According to ATCC, field enforcement agents do not currently use BWCs. To 
meet the bill’s requirements, ATCC needs to purchase 35 BWCs at a cost of $2,000  
per camera. Future year expenditures reflect ongoing costs for video storage, licensing, and 
other operational support for the BWCs. To the extent that additional BWC maintenance 
and storage are needed, out-year expenditures increase further.   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 321/ Page 4 
Morgan State University 
 
Higher education expenditures for Morgan State University increase by at least $563,000 
in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of purchasing 80 BWCs and for data storage, redaction, and compliance 
requirements necessary to ensure transparency, accountability, and adherence to Maryland 
public records and retention laws. To the extent that additional BWC equipment, 
maintenance, and storage are needed, fiscal 2027 and out-year expenditures increase 
further.  
 
Bowie State University 
 
Higher education expenditures for Bowie State University likely increase for expanded 
implementation of its BWC program. Although the university did not provide an estimate 
of the number of additional BWCs needed to meet the bill’s requirements, costs include 
the purchase of BWCs and the necessary infrastructure to download, store, and retain data 
for the mandated retention period. Future year expenditures likely include costs for BWC 
maintenance and data retention and storage.  
 
Other State Law Enforcement Agencies 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly included $428,790 for the 
purchase of BWCs for officers within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS). As a result, DPSCS advises that it can handle the bill’s requirements 
with existing resources.  
 
The Department of Natural Resources advises that a minor change in policy is necessary 
as a result of the bill; however, the department reports that it currently has enough licenses 
for BWC equipment to meet the bill’s requirements.  
 
Other State law enforcement agencies may incur costs to expand their BWC programs due 
to the bill’s changes. Any such costs are unknown.  
 
Local Expenditures:  While some counties and municipalities already meet or can comply 
with the bill’s expanded BWC requirements using existing resources, expenditures 
increase, potentially significantly, for other local law enforcement agencies. Based on a 
limited survey of local governments, the following information was gleaned regarding the 
anticipated costs to implement the bill:   
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 321/ Page 5 
 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Howard, and Montgomery counties, the City of 
Frostburg, and the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission report that they 
already meet or can handle the expanded BWC requirements with existing 
resources; 
 
Harford County estimates costs of approximately $46,200 annually for the purchase 
of additional BWCs and related costs; 
 
Talbot County estimates costs of approximately $5,900 annually for the purchase of 
additional cameras and for related costs;  
 
the Maryland Association of Counties advises that while some counties may be able 
to meet the bill using existing resources, other counties could incur costs of up to 
$200,000 for the initial purchase of additional BWCs and storage, with other 
potential costs; and  
 
the Maryland Municipal League reports that the bill has a notable fiscal impact on 
municipalities with police departments for the purchase of BWCs, expanded video 
storage and management, and additional support staff, among other things.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar bills have been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 661 and HB 707 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and Talbot counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Washington 
Suburban Sanitary Commission; cities of College Park, Frostburg, and Rockville; 
Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s 
Office; Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Department of Budget and Management; Department of General Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5